A Simple Modeling Framework For Prediction In The Human
Glucose-Insulin System
Melike Sirlanci5¤* , Matthew E. Levine5 , Cecilia Low Wang6 David J. Albers1,2,3,4 , Andrew M. Stuart5 ,

arXiv:1910.14193v3 [q-bio.QM] 21 Sep 2022

1 Department of Biomedical Informatics, School of Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz
Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA
2 Department of Bioengineering, College of Engineering, Design, and Computing, Aurora, CO, USA
3 Department of Biostatistics & Informatics, Colorado School of Public Health, Aurora, CO, USA
4 Department of Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA
5 Department of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,
CA, USA
6 Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes, Department of Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA
¤Current Address: Department of Biomedical Informatics, School of Medicine, University of Colorado
Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO, USA
*melike.sirlanci@cuanschutz.edu
Abstract
In this paper, we build a new, simple, and interpretable mathematical model to estimate and
forecast physiology related to the human glucose-insulin system, constrained by available data. By
constructing a simple yet flexible model class with interpretable parameters, this general model can
be specialized to work in different settings, such as type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and intensive
care unit (ICU); different choices of appropriate model functions describing uptake of nutrition and
removal of glucose differentiate between the models. In addition to data-driven decision-making,
the model has the potential also to be useful for the basic quantification of endocrine physiology.
In both cases, the available data is sparse and collected in clinical settings, major factors that have
constrained our model choice to the simple form adopted.
The model has the form of a linear stochastic differential equation (SDE) to describe the
evolution of the BG level. The model includes a term quantifying glucose removal from the
bloodstream through the regulation system of the human body and two other terms representing
the effect of nutrition and externally delivered insulin. The stochastic fluctuations encapsulate
model error necessitated by the simple model form and enable flexible incorporation of data.
The parameters entering the equation must be learned in a patient-specific fashion, leading to
personalized models. We present experimental results on patient-specific parameter estimation
and future BG level forecasting in T2DM and ICU settings. The resulting model leads to the
prediction of the BG level as an expected value accompanied by a band around this value which
accounts for uncertainties in the prediction. Such predictions, then, have the potential for use as
part of control systems that are robust to model imperfections and noisy data. Finally, the model’s
predictive capability is compared with two different models built explicitly for T2DM and ICU
contexts. Our simple model also shows clear advantages over the more complex models in terms of
parameter inference and identifiability, as well as controllability, stemming from its linearity.

1

1

Introduction

Broadly speaking mathematical models of human physiology may serve one of two purposes: elucidation
of the detailed mechanisms which comprise the complex systems underlying observed physiology; or
prediction of outcomes from the complex system, for the purposes of medical intervention to ameliorate
undesirable outcomes. In principle, these two objectives interact: a model which explains the detailed
mechanisms, if physiologically accurate and compatible with observed data, will of course be good for
prediction. However, human physiological data are often too sparse for use in resolving high-fidelity
physiological details; moreover, this sparsity can induce severe model unidentifiability that impedes
inference efficiency and results in suboptimal predictive performance. One approach to mitigate
unidentifiability issues with high-fidelity models is to constrain inference. However, in this paper, we
focus on how model reduction and stochastic closure techniques can be applied to physiologic models
to make them more identifiable from available data. This, of course, comes with a cost of reduced
fidelity; however, we find that this tradeoff often sides with model simplicity, especially when data are
low-fidelity (i.e. sparse and noisy) and the underlying system is not fully understood (i.e. available
“high-fidelity” models have substantial inadequacies). The human glucose-insulin system provides an
important example of this challenge because in many settings, insulin∗ —a dominant state variable—is
rarely measured.
The objective of the work presented here is to distill existing mechanistic models of the human
endocrine system into an interpretable model of human glucose dynamics that is identifiable from
real-world clinical data. We do this by approximating the insulin’s glycemic regulation as an OrnsteinUhlenbeck process (a linear stochastic differential equation with exponential mean-reversion), then
further introducing forcing terms that parameterize exogenous effects of nutrition and medication.
The resulting model represents the mean blood glucose (BG) behavior and a confidence region
quantifying the amplitude of the BG oscillations. These confidence regions can also be used to quantify
the uncertainty in the mean BG behavior. We then evaluate the predictive performance of this
simple model on clinical datasets in an outpatient type 2 diabetes setting and an inpatient intensive
care unit setting. We compare its predictive performance with state-of-the-art predictions given by
a physiologically constrained inference machinery paired with popular mechanistic models of the
glucose-insulin system (from which our reduced model was inspired).
The key finding from this work is non-inferior predictive capacity of our simple linear stochastic
model when compared to higher complexity non-linear models. This indicates that the severity of
our clinical data constraints prevented us from extracting additional expressivity from the non-linear
models beyond the simple dynamics encoded by a forced linear SDE. Alternatively, it may be that the
additional expressivity of the non-linear models is not of the right type, and thus does not offer much
additional predictive advantage (despite having clear mechanistic validity).
Researchers have developed various mathematical models ranging from extremely simple to highly
complex, using ordinary differential equations (ODEs) and machine learning (ML) to predict and
describe human glucose metabolism. We discuss these efforts organized according to model usage.
Some mechanistic models are developed to investigate a specific phenomenon of the glucose-insulin
system such as to understand the different phases of insulin secretion with respect to different glucose
∗ Here, we refer to internal insulin levels such as plasma insulin or interstitial insulin; not the dosages of medication.

2

stimulation patterns, to estimate insulin sensitivity in the intravenous glucose tolerance test (IVGTT)
setting, and to elucidate the cause of the ultradian (long-period) oscillations of insulin and glucose,
[1–7]. Others have developed models by clinically minded motivations to describe β-cell mass, glucose,
and insulin dynamics and to investigate T2DM pathophysiology, [8–11]. Some researchers developed
models to describe the underlying system in more detailed way such as the events that occur during
oral glucose ingestion [12, 13], or relevant organ systems, [14]. A nice review of the models developed
for clinical and physiological investigation BG homeostasis and T2DM can be found in [15].
There are also machine learning models developed to understand model phenotypic and health care
process differences and to predict T2DM development, [16–27].
Researchers have developed mechanistic models to address challenges including fast evolution of
the underlying system (parameter variation in time), wide variation in clinical response within and
between patients, sparse measurements, and concerns about safety issues with the goals of prediction
and control of BG levels, [28–38]. Others developed stochastic (mechanistic) models with the same
purpose, [39–45].
Glucose control based on mechanistic modeling is the focus of the artificial pancreas project in the
type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) setting and many models are developed for this purpose, [46–52].
A comprehensive range of BG control algorithms can be found in [53]. Finally, other researchers
conducted clinical trials to compare the efficacy between different closed-loop artificial pancreas systems
and sensor-assisted pump therapy for T1DM patients, [54–58].
ML approaches have been proposed in pure prediction tasks such as predicting next glucose values
or hypoglycemia. For these purposes, some researchers used classification methods and neural network
models, [59–65], while others used ARIMA (auto-regressive integrated moving average) and linear
regression models, [66–73].
Finally, in [74], the authors developed a hybrid model balancing a physiological and statistical model
of glucose-insulin dynamics to forecast long-term BG levels of T1DM patients based on real-world
data, showing the possibility of outperforming the forecasting of BG levels obtained by either pure
physiological or pure statistical models alone.
Patient-centered disease self-management is a crucial tool to improve health condition of patients
focusing on their needs, life style, and preferences. Some researchers investigated techniques for effective
self glycemic management and developed computational model-based decision support tools for T2DM
patients, [75–84].
In all of the models discussed above, parameter estimation plays a vital role in the accuracy of
predictions. Parameters are rarely directly measurable, and their values will vary from one patient
to another. There are two overarching approaches to estimating parameters, optimization where a
model-data mismatch is minimized to determine parameters [85], and the Bayesian approach [86]
where the distribution of the parameters, given the data and given the assumed (noisy) model-data
framework, is computed. Researchers used various approaches for parameter estimation. The most
common approaches are the standard least squares optimization, [29, 87], nonlinear least squares
optimization, [88], and Bayesian approach to estimate both time-invariant and time-varying model
parameters, [89].
Our contribution in this paper is summarized below.

3

• We describe a simple, interpretable, modeling framework limited to states and parameters that
are directly observable or inferable from data for prediction within the human glucose-insulin
system, based on a continuous time linear, Gaussian, stochastic differential equation (SDE) for
glucose dynamics, in which the effect of insulin appears parametrically.
• We completely describe the inference machinery necessary—in a data assimilation and inverse
problems framework—to estimate a SDE model of glucose dynamics with real-world data.
• The framework is sufficiently general to be usable within the ICU, T2DM, and potentially T1DM
settings.
• The solution of the model can be obtained analytically, which means that it does not require
numerical solver and the prediction could quickly be obtained in an online setting. Hence the
model could easily be used in any platform for prediction based on real-world data.
• We demonstrate, in a train-test set-up, that the models are able to fit individual patients with
reasonable accuracy; both ICU and T2DM data are used. The test framework we use is a
predictive one laying the foundations for future control methodologies.
• Comparison of the data fitting for T2DM and ICU patients reveals interesting structural differences
in their glucose regulation.
• We make a comparison of the predictive power of our stochastic modeling framework with that
of more sophisticated models developed for both T2DM and the ICU, demonstrating that the
simple stochastic approach is at least as accurate as these models in both settings.
In Section 2.2, we introduce the general continuous-time mathematical model that describes the
human glucose regulatory system. Then, in Section 2.4, we introduce the specific versions of this model
relevant in T2DM and ICU settings. The two model classes all derive from a single general model,
and differ according to how nutrition uptake and glucose removal are represented. In Section 2.5, we
construct the framework for stating the parameter estimation problem and its solution. In Section
2.6, we describe the datasets, the experiments we design for parameter estimation and forecasting,
and the methods we use for parameter estimation and forecasting for the T2DM and ICU settings.
Section 3 presents the experimental results on parameter estimation and forecasting along with some
uncertainty quantification (UQ) results separately for T2DM and ICU settings. Finally, in Section 4,
we make some concluding remarks and discuss future directions that we intend to pursue.

2

Materials and Methods

In this section, we describe the clinical settings of interest, our model construction, the mathematical
techniques, and the experimental design.

2.1

Clinical Settings of Interest

The model that we develop can be used in T2DM and ICU settings with appropriate adjustments,
which will be presented in Section 2.2. In this section, we describe the respective clinical settings that
4

structure our modeling approach.
2.1.1

Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM)

Glucose dynamics in this setting are driven by a combination of diet, activity, medication, and internal
physiology. Here, we specifically focus on modeling the effect of carbohydrate intake on glycemic
levels of people with T2DM. The self-monitoring T2DM dataset is from a previous prospective selfmanagement trial. It contains the carbohydrate intake in the meals and 1-2 BG measurements collected
before and after the meals with the corresponding timing of each event. None of the T2DM patients in
our dataset took exogenous insulin to control their BG level. This means that the carbohydrate intake
is the only input to our model.
The BG levels of T2DM patients show non-stationary behavior over long time-scales reflecting
gradual changes in the health condition. The observable BG behavior change could occur over timescales on the order of months. Therefore, it is possible to capture system dynamics with a mechanistic
model over shorter time intervals, i.e., weeks, and use that information to forecast BG levels over the
following few weeks. This type of predictive tool would be beneficial for T2DM patients in managing
their disease. Thus, in this setting, we design the predictive framework to provide decision aid to
T2DM patients in self-management.
2.1.2

Intensive Care Unit (ICU)

In the ICU setting, glucose dynamics are given by a combination of changing patient physiologic state,
nutrition (delivered intravenously and enterally through a feeding tube that runs to the gut), and
insulin delivery. In ICU setting, on average, 8-10% of the ICU patients are diabetic and only 5% of
those are T1DM patients. However, more than 90% of ICU patients require glycemic management
and 10-20% of them experience a hypoglycemic event over the course of management. Consequently,
regardless of being diabetic or non-diabetic, they are typically given IV insulin to control BG levels.
Patients in the ICU typically have much more volatile physiological dynamics for at least three
reasons: glycemic dynamics under continuous feeding are oscillatory, the patients are acutely ill and
their health state changes quickly because of their disease state, and the patients are constantly being
intervened on to help them heal. Therefore they exhibit BG time series that are often non-stationary
in complex ways and on different time scales. On slower time scales, patients eventually leave the ICU
because their health either improves or declines. But there can be fast time scale changes too due to
interventions and/or sudden health-related events, such as a stroke. These health changes will lead to
changes in the best-fit parameters of the model; in other words the patient-specific model itself may
change abruptly, in contrast to the T2DM case.
The retrospective ICU dataset is extracted from the Columbia University Medical Center Clinical
Data Warehouse. It contains carbohydrate rate through the enteral feeding tube, IV insulin rate, BG
measurements, and the timing of all these events. It is important to emphasize that we do not have
plasma insulin or interstitial insulin rate, as they are collected rarely. The carbohydrate and IV insulin
rates are the inputs to the model. Considering the highly non-stationary behavior of the system, the
BG measurements are sparse, at most 15 measurements per day. In this case, we aim this predictive
framework to be used as a clinical decision support tool in the ICU setting.
5

2.2

Model construction

To begin construction of a simple, one-state model for glucose dynamics, we first consider the classical
two-state Bergman [2] equations:
Ġ = mexternal (t) + fHGP (G) − (c + sI I)G
I˙ = Iexternal (t) + βfISR (G) − kI.

(1a)
(1b)

Here, G denotes plasma glucose concentration and I denotes plasma insulin concentration. External
inputs of nutrition and insulin are given by mexternal (t), Iexternal (t), respectively. The insulin dynamics,
beyond external forcing, are primarily governed by a glucose-dependent secretion rate fISR (G), insulinproducing beta-cell mass β, and linear degradation rate k. The glucose dynamics, aside from external
forcing (i.e. meals), are driven by a glucose-dependent (insulin independent) hepatic glucose production
fHGP , an insulin-dependent glucose removal rate IG (with insulin sensitivity factor sI ), and a linear
degradation rate c.
In this work, we hypothesize that the pancreatic and hepatic regulation of glucose can instead be
approximated by a simple function of glucose finternal (G). We also account for the effect of external
insulin to the blood glucose level and add a closure term, ν. This results in a new single-state equation
Ġ = mexternal (t) + finternal (G) + fexternal (I) + ν(t),

(2)

where the closure term ν(t) accounts for additional glycemic dynamics not captured by the first three
terms. To begin evaluating the utility of this perspective, we choose simple forms for these unknown
functions.
Specifically, we assume that glucose regulation can be roughly approximated by an exponential decay

to a fixed point Gb at rate γ such that finternal (G) := −γ G(t) − Gb . We also assume that the effect of
external insulin delivery has a simple relationship fexternal (I) := βIexternal with proportionality constant
β. Finally, we assume that the possibly large residual errors induced by these simplifying assumptions
p
are given by a Brownian Motion W (t) with variance quantified by σ.; i.e ν(t) := 2γσ 2 Ẇ (t). Note
√
that, the term, 2γ is included to actually have σ to represent the variance of the process and γ is
a relaxation time-scale. Although counter intuitive in this representation, the solution of the event
time model, given in (4) below, shows the variance of the system dominantly represented by σ. These
choices yield the following Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model for evolution of blood glucose G(t):
Ġ(t) = −γ(G(t) − Gb ) + m(t) − βI(t) +

p

2γσ 2 Ẇ (t).

(3)

There are four basic parameters for the model in Section 3. Gb (mg/dl) represents the basal glucose
(i.e. the mean of the unforced process), γ (1/min) is the decay rate for the exponential mean reversion,
β (mg/(dl*U)) is a proportionality constant for the linear effect of IV insulin-based glucose removal,
and σ (mg/dl) governs the variance of the oscillations described by W (t).
We use simple models for the meal function m(t) and the insulin delivery function I(t) (defined in
Section 2.4) that enable explicit solution of the continuous time model between events. We define
events as times at which the meal or insulin delivery functions change discontinuously, or points at
6

which BG is measured.
The simple linear Gaussian structure of Ornstein-Uhlenbeck models, along with appropriately simple
forcing terms m(t), I(t) (defined in Section 2.4), allow for tractable solutions to Section 3. Specifically,
integration of the system leads to a solution G(t) that is normally distributed with analytically
calculable mean and variance.

2.3

Advantages of a Linear SDE Model

In accordance with our goal, which is to develop a highly simplified yet interpretable model, we
work with a forced SDE of Ornstein-Uhlenbeck type to describe glucose evolution, together with an
observation model of linear form, subject to additive Gaussian noise. The Gaussian structure allows
for computational tractability in prediction since probability distributions on the glucose state are
described by Gaussians and hence represented by simply a mean and variance. With this modeling
choice, we approximate the distribution of glucose levels by Gaussian distribution. However, this is
a limitation of our modeling approach because the distribution of glucose levels resembles Gamma
distribution rather than Gaussian distribution. Note that the protocols for managing glucose depend
on intervals; e.g., a goal may be to keep glucose between 80-150 mg/dl and interval deviation from this
goal, e.g., 151-180 mg/dl, induce changes in the insulin dosage. This means that decisions are made
based on boundaries of glycemic trajectories. Nevertheless, because glucose oscillates under continuous
feeding, clinicians typically aim to ensure that the glycemic mean does not fall below 60 mg/dl or
above 180 mg/dl for any length of time. The intervals are then a proxy for this balance of managing
the mean and protecting against trajectories diverging too high or low at any time, including between
observations, [90]. Hence accurately resolving mean and standard deviation in BG levels is important.
The Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process has four contributions: a damping term which drives the BG level
towards its base value at a rate which is possibly insulin dependent; a forcing representing nutritional
intake, exogenously delivered insulin, and a white noise contribution, which is used to encapsulate
the high-frequency dynamics as these dynamics are difficult to be resolved with sparse measurements.
The presence of noise in the glucose evolution model, as well as in the data acquisition process, allows
for model error which is natural in view of the the rather simple modeling framework. Moreover, the
existence of the analytic solution of the model makes it possible to perform parameter estimation with
wide range of filtering and smoothing techniques based on the real-world data.

2.4

Event-Time Model

For computational purposes, and because data are typically available at discrete times, we develop a
discrete-time version of the model (3). We first present it in generality, then develop it specifically for
outpatient Type 2 Diabetes (T2DM) glucose modeling (see Section 2.4.1) and for inpatient intensive
care unit (ICU) glucose modeling (see Section 2.4.2). Note that ICU and T2DM settings are also the
focus for our data-driven studies.
(m)

m
The time discretization is defined completely by a dataset in the following sense. Let {tk }K
k=1

(i)
i
denote the times of relevant nutrition events, let {tk }K
k=1 denote the times of relevant insulin delivery
(o) Ko
events, and let {tk }k=1 denote the times of glucose measurements. We call the re-ordered union of

7

these sets,
(m)

(i)

(o)

Ko
Km
Ki
{tk }N
k=0 := {tk }k=1 ∪ {tk }k=1 ∪ {tk }k=1

as event times, where the superscripts, m, i, and o, are used to distinguish the relevant nutrition
delivery, insulin delivery, and BG measurement times.
We can obtain the following event-time model by integrating (3) over the event-time intervals,
[tk , tk+1 ) for k = 0, 1, ..., N − 1, via use of Itô formula, [91]: ∗∗
G(tk+1 ) = Gb + e−γhk (G(tk ) − Gb ) +
p
+ σ 1 − e−2γhk ξk ,

Z tk+1
tk

Z tk+1

e−γ(tk+1 −s) m(s)ds −

e−γ(tk+1 −s) βI(s)ds

tk

(4)

where hk := tk+1 − tk and ξk ∼ N (0, 1) independent random variables. We exhibit specific versions of
this general event-time model for T2DM and ICU settings in more detail in the following sections.
2.4.1

T2DM model

Based on the conditions of T2DM setting detailed in subsection 2.1, we set I(t) ≡ 0, i.e., we ignore the

exogenous insulin term in the T2DM event-time model. The meal function, m(t), on the other hand, is
essential for capturing the uptake of glucose into the bloodstream from consumed carbohydrates. Here,
we define m(t) as the difference of two exponential functions (this choice was shown to be effective in
the T2DM case by [92]):
m(t) =

Km
X
Gk

ck

k=1
(m)

where tk

(m)

(e−a(t−tk

(m)

− e−b(t−tk

)

)

)1[t(m) ,∞) (t)

(5)

k

is the time of the k th meal, Gk (mg/dl) is the total amount of glucose in the k th meal

divided by the approximate volume of blood, and ck is a dimensionless normalizing constant so that
R ∞ −a(t−t(m) )
(m)
1
k
(m) (e
− e−b(t−tk ) )dt = 1. Note that 1[a,b) (·) is the indicator function and defined as
ck t
k

1[a,b)] (x) =
Therefore, the model in (3) becomes
Ġ(t) = −γ(G(t) − Gb ) +

Km
X
Gk

k=1

ck


1,
0,
(m)

(e−a(t−tk

)

x ∈ [a, b),

otherwise.

(m)

− e−b(t−tk

)

)1[t(m) ,∞) (t) +
k

p
2γσ 2 Ẇ (t),

(6)

in the T2DM setting. In this model, the first term represents the body’s own effect to remove insulin
from the bloodstream, the second term represents the effect of nutrition on the rate of change of BG,
and the last term models the unmodeled dynamics by the first two terms as white noise. Integrating
∗∗ equivalent to using integrating factors in this case

8

over [t0 , t], we can write the analytic solution of this equation as
G(t) = Gb + e−γ(t−t0 ) (G(t0 ) − Gb )
+
+

K
m
X

k=1
Z t
t0

Gk
ck

(m)

e−a(t−tk

e−γ(t−s)

(m)

− e−γ(t−tk
γ−a
)

(m)

)

−

(m)

− e−γ(t−tk
γ−b

e−b(t−tk

p
2γσ 2 dW (s).

)

)

!

1[t(m) ,∞) (t)
k

(7)

Note that, in practice, we need to evaluate BG level at specific time points and hence need the
discrete-time model implied by the continuous time representation in (7). Now, by integrating (6) over
[tk , tk+1 ) and denoting gk := G(tk ), we obtain
gk+1 = Gb + e−γhk (gk − Gb ) + mk + σ

p

1 − e−2γhk ξk ,
(m)

as a special case of (4). Also, for any fixed tk , find the meal times tj

(m)

such that tj

the index set of these meal times by Ik . Then mk in (8) becomes
mk =

X Gj

j∈Ik

(m)

e−a(tk+1 −tj

cj

)

(m)

− e−γhk e−a(tk −tj
γ−a

(m)

)

−

e−b(tk+1 −tj

(8)

)

≤ tk and denote
(m)

− e−γhk e−b(tk −tj
γ−b

)

!

.

(9)

Hence, note that in this case, we have five model parameters to be estimated: Gb , γ, σ, a, b. Recall that
in this setting, Gb represents the basal glucose value that BG level stays around starting some time
after nutrition intake until the next nutrition intake. γ represents the decay rate of BG level to Gb
after the nutrition intake, and σ represents the amplitude of the BG level oscillations. The parameters
a and b entering the meal function implicitly control the time needed for the glucose nutrition rate to
reach its peak value, and the time needed for this rate to return back to the vicinity of 0. Because
of these simple physiological meanings, the parameters entering the event-time model are important
not only for accurately capturing, and predicting, glucose dynamics based on data, but also contain
implicit information about the health condition of the patient. For example, the basal glucose value is
measured during some tests to check if an individual is healthy pre-diabetic, or diabetic.
2.4.2

ICU model

The specifics of the ICU setting and the available data, as described in Section 2.1, defines the structure
of our ICU model. In this case, we model both the carbohydrate intake, m(t), and IV insulin delivery,
I(t).
We choose to model these external forcings as piecewise constants functions; this choice corresponds
to clinical practice, in which constant infusions are periodically adjusted, and also allows for simple
calculations.
Here, we define the nutritional forcing function as
m(t) =

Km
X

dk 1[t(m) ,t(m) ) (t),
k

k=1

9

k+1

(10)

(m)

where tk

is the time at which a clinician changes the nutrition delivery rate, dk is the nutrition
(m)

(m)

rate over the time interval [tk , tk+1 ); these features are both directly available in our clinical dataset.
Similarly, we define the external insulin delivery rate as
I(t) =

K
i
X

ik 1[t(i) ,t(i) ) (t),
k

k=1

(11)

k+1

(i)

(i)

where ik is the rate of insulin over the time interval [tk , tk+1 ), again obtained directly from the
dataset.
Therefore, substituting (10) and (11) into the general equation (3), the ICU version of our model
becomes

Ġ(t) = −γ(G(t) − Gb ) +

Km
X

k=1

dk 1[t(m) ,t(m) ) (t) − β
k

k+1

Ki
X

ik 1[t(i) ,t(i) ) (t) +
k

k=1

k+1

p
2γσ 2 Ẇ (t).

(12)

In this model, the first term models the glucose removal rate with the body’s own effort (γ), the
second term shows the effect of nutrition m(t) on the BG level, the third term, βI(t), models the
external insulin effect, and the last term models unmodeled dynamics by the first three terms as a
white noise term.
We integrate (12) to get the analytical solution for any t ≥ t0 as follows

G(t) = Gb + e
−β

−γ(t−t0 )

Ki
X

k=1

ik

(G(t0 ) − Gb ) +

Z t
t0

e

−γ(t−s)

K
m
X

k=1

dk

Z t
t0

e−γ(t−s) 1[t(m) ,t(m) ) (s)ds

1[t(i) ,t(i) ) (s)ds +
k

k+1

k

p

2γσ 2

Z t

k+1

(13)
e

−γ(t−s)

dW (s).

t0

As in the previous section, we can also integrate (12) over [tk , tk+1 ) to obtain solutions at event-times,
with gk = G(tk ),

gk+1 = Gb + e−γhk (gk − Gb ) +

p
1
1
(1 − e−γhk )dk − β (1 − e−γhk )ik + σ 1 − e−2γhk ξk
γ
γ

(14)

as another special case of (4). Here, we have four model parameters to estimate: Gb , γ, σ, β.
Remember once again, Gb is the basal glucose value and γ is the decay rate of the BG level to its basal
value, and σ is a measure for the magnitude of the BG oscillations. Finally, β is a proportionality
constant, which is used to scale the effect of IV insulin on the BG rate change appropriately. These
four parameters represent physiologically valid quantities that could properly resolve the mean and
variance of the BG level.

10

2.5

Parameter Estimation

In this section we formulate the parameter estimation problem. We construct an overarching Bayesian
framework for our parameter estimation problems. We then describe two solution approaches for this
problem: an optimization based approach which identifies the most likely solution, given our model
and data assumptions; and Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), which samples the distribution on
parameters, given data, under the same model and data assumptions. These two solution approaches
are detailed in the Supplementary Material.
As shown in detail before, our model takes slightly different forms in the T2DM and ICU settings.
In the former the model parameters to be estimated are Gb , γ, σ, a, b whereas in the latter the unknown
parameters are Gb , γ, σ, β. However, we adopt a single approach to parameter estimation. To describe
this approach we let the vector, θ represent the unknown model parameters to be determined from the
data, noting that this is a different set of parameters in each case. Many problems in biomedicine,
and the problems we study here in particular, have both noisy models and noisy data, leading to a
relationship between parameter θ and data y of the form
y = G(θ, ζ)

(15)

where unknown ζ is a realization of a mean zero random variable, but its value is not known to us.
The objective is to recover θ from y. We will show how our model of the glucose regulatory system
lead to such a model.
The Bayesian approach to parameter estimation is desirable for two primary reasons: first it allows
for seamless incorporation of imprecise prior information with uncertain mathematical model and
noisy data, by adopting a formulation in which all variables have probabilities associated to them;
secondly it allows for the quantification of uncertainty in the parameter estimation. Whilst extraction
of information from the posterior probability distribution on parameters given data is challenging,
stable and practical computational methodology based around the Bayesian formulation has emerged
over the last few decades; see [93]. In this work, we will follow two approaches: (a) obtaining the
maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimator, which leads to an optimization problem for the most likely
parameter given the data, and (b) obtaining samples from the posterior distribution on parameter
given data, using MCMC techniques.
Now let us formulate the parameter estimation problem. Within the event-time framework, let
Ko
N
g = [gk ]N
k=0 be the vector of BG levels at event times {tk }k=0 , and y = [yk ]k=1 be the vector of
(o)

N
o
measurements at the measurement times {tk }K
k=1 ⊂ {tk }k=0 . By using the event-time version, and

defining {ξk }N
k=0 to be independent and identically distributed standard normal random variables, we

see that given the parameters θ, g has multivariate normal distribution, i.e., P(g|θ) = N (m(θ), C(θ)).
Equivalently,
g = m(θ) +

p

C(θ)ξ, ξ ∼ N (0, I).

(16)

Ko
Let L be a Ko ×(N +1) matrix that maps {gk }N
k=0 to {yk }k=1 . That is, if a measurement i ∈ 1, ..., Ko

is taken at the event time tj , j ∈ 0, 1, ..., N , then the ith row of L has all 0’s except the (j + 1)st

11

element, which is 1. Adding a measurement noise, we state the observation equation as follows:
y = Lg +

p

Γ(θ)η, η ∼ N (0, I),

(17)

where Γ(θ) is a diagonal matrix representing the measurement noise. Thus, we obtain the likelihood
of the data, given the glucose time-series and the parameters, namely
P(y|g, θ) = N (Lg, Γ(θ)).
However, when performing parameter estimation, we are not interested in the glucose time-series itself,
but only in the parameters. Thus we directly find the likelihood of the data given the parameters
(implicitly integrating out g) by combining (16) and (17) to obtain
y = Lm(θ) +

p
S(θ)ζ, ζ ∼ N (0, I),

(18)

where S(θ) = LC(θ)LT + Γ(θ). Since ζ has multivariate normal distribution, using the properties of
this distribution, we find that given the parameters, θ, y also has multivariate normal distribution
with mean Lm(θ) and covariance matrix S(θ). This is the specific instance of equation (15) that arises
for the models in this paper.
We have thus obtained P(y|θ) = N (Lm(θ), S(θ)), that is,
P(y|θ) = p



1
exp − (y − Lm(θ))T S(θ)−1/2 (y − Lm(θ)) ;
2
(2π)Km det(S(θ)))
1

(19)

this is the likelihood of the data, y, given the parameters, θ. Also, since we prefer to use − log(P(y|θ))

rather than directly using P(y|θ) for the sake of computation, we state it explicitly as follows:

− log(P(y|θ)) =

Km
1
1
log(2π) + log(det(S(θ))) + (y − Lm(θ))T S(θ)−1 (y − Lm(θ)).
2
2
2

(20)

Moreover, by using Bayes Theorem, we write
P(θ|y) =

P(y|θ)P(θ)
∝ P(y|θ)P(θ).
P(y)

(21)

Note that the second statement of proportionality follows from the fact that the term, P(y), on
the denominator is constant with respect to the parameters, θ, and plays the role of a normalizing
constant.
From another point of view, considering (16) and (18), we see that given θ, (g, y) has multivariate
normal distribution with mean and covariance matrix that could be computed from the above equations
since, given θ, everything is explicitly known. Then, integrating g out, in other words, computing the
marginal distribution we obtain the distribution of y|θ, which corresponds to the one stated in (18).
Now, to define the prior distribution P(θ) we assume that the unknown parameters are distributed

12

uniformly across a bounded set Θ and define

 1 ,
1
P(θ) =
1Θ (θ) = |Θ|
 0,
|Θ|

θ ∈ Θ,
θ∈
/ Θ,

(22)

where 1Θ (·) is the indicator function and |Θ| is the volume of the region defined by Θ. Thus, by

substituting the likelihood, (19), and the prior distribution, (22), into (21), we formulate the posterior
distribution as follows


1
T
−1/2
p
P(θ|y) ∝
exp − (y − Lm(θ)) S(θ)
(y − Lm(θ)) 1Θ (θ).
2
|Θ| (2π)Km det(S(θ)))
1

(23)

Then, we use this posterior distribution to state the parameter estimation problem whose details
can be found in the Supplementary Material.

2.6

Experimental Design

In this section, we describe the datasets in more detail, the experiments that we design to present our
results, and the methods that we follow to perform parameter estimation and forecasting. Depending
on the specifics of each case and to reflect the real-life situation, we designed different experiments in
the T2DM and ICU settings. However, the mathematical approaches for parameter estimation and
forecasting stay the same for both settings because we use similar mechanistic models.
We theoretically define the observational noise covariance Γ(θ), given in (17), to be a diagonal
matrix with form diag(Γ(θ)) := λ ∗ Lm(θ), which represents that it is proportional to the mean BG

level. However, we observed that the variation in glycemic response, which we will define later more
formally, is the sum of the measurement noise and personal glycemic variation, accounted by the model
parameter, σ. Because of this relationship, for more accurate estimation of σ, we set the measurement
noise to 0. Note that this is only a practical choice and with this choice, we can still estimate the
variation in glycemic response accurately.
2.6.1

T2DM

Model, Parameters, and Dataset

In this setting, we use the model (8) with the function mk

defined as in (9). Hence, there are five parameters to be estimated: basal glucose value, Gb , BG decay
rate γ, the measure for the amplitude of BG oscillations, σ, and a and b, which are the parameters
implicitly modeling the time needed for the rate of glucose in the nutrition entering the bloodstream
to reach its maximum value and the total time needed for this rate to decrease back to 0. We assume
that the prior distribution is non-informative and initially the parameters are independent, except
for a constraint on the ordering of a and b. We determine realistic lower and upper bound values for
each of them, define Θ0 := [0, 750] × [0.01, 0.5] × [0, 100] × [0.01, 0.05] × [0.01, 0.05] (in the order of

Gb , γ, σ, a, b), and then define Θ from Θ0 by adding the constraint a < b. We thereby form the prior
distribution as defined in (22). Recall that these bounds define the constraints employed when we
define the parameter estimation problem in the optimization setting for the MAP point. The set
Θ is determined from clinical and physiological prior knowledge, and by simulating the model (6)

13

and requiring realistic BG levels. Data are collected from three different T2DM patients. Detailed
information on the dataset can be found in Table 1.
Patient ID
Total # glucose measurement
Total # meals recorded
Total # days measured
Mean measured glucose
Training set: # glucose measurement
Training set: # meals recorded
Training set: # days measured
Training set: mean measured glucose
Testing set: # glucose measurement
Testing set: # meals recorded
Testing set: # days measured
Testing set: mean measured glucose

patient 1
304
122
26.6
113±25
80
26
7.02
112±25
224
96
19.58
113±25

patient 2
211
76
27.67
127±32
53
18
7
116±28
158
58
20.67
130±33

patient 3
91
46
28.12
124±26
29
15
7.05
125±24
31
62
21.07
123±27

Table 1: Information about the dataset that is used in the T2DM setting, which is collected from three
different T2DM patients. Note that there is a considerable variability between the data collection
behavior of each patient, which is also reflected in the number of recorded measurements and meals.
Also, recall that we intentionally used one week of data for training and the following three week of
data for testing.

Parameter Estimation and Uncertainty Quantification We perform parameter estimation for
three patients separately. First, we estimate parameters by using data over four consecutive, nonoverlapping time intervals with optimization and MCMC approaches. Besides estimated values, we also
provide UQ results. In the optimization setting, we use the Laplace approximation as detailed in the
Supplementary Material. The optimal parameters determine the mean of the Gaussian approximation,
and the inverse of the Hessian matrix becomes the covariance matrix, providing the tools for UQ. In
the MCMC approach, we use the resulting random samples for UQ.
Forecasting We adopt a train-test set-up as follows. Since the health conditions of the T2DM
patients are unlikely to change over time intervals that are on the order of days, we design an experiment
in which we use one week of data for estimating the patient-specific parameters. Then, we use the
estimated parameters to form a patient-specific model and use this model to forecast BG levels for the
following three weeks, using the known glucose input through the meals; this leads to a three-week
testing phase. We provide a visual representation of this process in Fig 1. From a practical patientcentric point of view this leads to a setting in which forecasting BG levels for the following three weeks
requires patients to collect BG data for only one week in every month, and then the patient-specific
model will be able to capture their dynamics and provide forecasts based on nutrition intake data over
the rest of the month.

14

Figure 1: This schema shows how we divided T2DM patients’ data into training and test time windows.
For each patient, the first week of data is the training time window used to estimate the model. The
estimated model represents each patient’s personalized BG behavior and is used to forecast BG values
over the test time window, which is of length three weeks and follows the training time window.
2.6.2

ICU

Model, Parameters, and Dataset

In the ICU setting, we use the model (14), and there are now

four parameters to be estimated: basal glucose value, Gb , BG decay rate, γ, the parameter used to
quantify the amplitude of the oscillations in the BG level, σ, and a proportionality constant, β to
scale the effect of insulin IV on the BG level. Similar to what we did in the T2DM setting, we find
realistic lower and upper bounds for the unknown parameter values and set Θ := [0, 750] × [0.02, 0.5] ×

[0, 100] × [20, 110] to obtain the prior distribution as defined in (22). In this case, we impose two further
linear constraints, namely Gb − 3.5 ∗ β < 115 and β − 1110γ < 10. These constraints are imposed

to ensure that the model predictions remain biophysically plausible, and are determined simply by
forward simulation of the SDE model; the resulting inequality constraints do not overly constrain the
parameters in that good fits can be found which satisfy these constraints, and yet they yield more
realistic BG level behavior than solutions found without them. Thus as in the T2DM case, we choose
the bounds and the constraints based on physiological knowledge and requiring simulated BG levels
resulting from values within the region Θ to be realistic.
Patient ID
Total # glucose measurement
Total # days measured
Mean measured glucose
Training set: average # glucose measurement
Testing set: average # glucose measurement

patient 4
177
13.99
141±18
14.13
1

patient 5
204
16.8
151±32
13.5
1

patient 6
271
24.48
151±43
14.07
1

Table 2: Information about the dataset that is used in the ICU setting, collected from three ICU
patients who are not T2DM. Because of the experiment we designed the training sets are moving with
by overlapping with each other. So, we provide average number of glucose measurements over these
moving windows. Also, since we forecast until the next measurement time following the training time
window, each testing set contains only one glucose measurement. Other information that is included
in Table 1, but not here, such as mean measured glucose over training set(s) is neither meaningful nor
helpful in this setting.
Summary statistics about our ICU dataset can be found in Table 2. Note that in this case, we used
all available data for each patient to perform parameter estimation and forecasting, and all three ICU
15

patients are non-T2DM.
Parameter Estimation and Uncertainty Quantification

We use both the optimization and

MCMC approaches for parameter estimation in a patient-specific manner, in this setting, too. However,
for UQ, we use only MCMC to estimate the posterior mean and variance on the parameter; this is
because there were cases where it was not appropriate to use the Laplace approximation, something
that will be explained in more detail in Section 3.2.
Forecasting

The characteristics of the health conditions of ICU patients are described in Section

2.1. The abrupt changes in their health conditions are reflected in the model parameters. To avoid
compensating for different values of parameters over longer time intervals, and to make more accurate
predictions, we use only one day of data for parameter estimation in the ICU. Moreover, to construct
an experiment that reflects real-life scenarios, we need be able to estimate the model parameters with
smaller size datasets than in the T2DM case, because of the imperative of regular intervention within
the ICU setting, typically on a time-scale of hours. As a consequence our train-test set-up in this case
differs quantitatively from the T2DM case. The training sets for each patient consist of approximately
one day of data over a moving time intervals, with end points chosen to be BG measurement times.
Thus, the time windows are obtained by moving the right end point to the next BG measurement time
and choosing its left end point with the constraint that it contains approximately one day of data. In
this case, there is a large overlap between the consecutive time windows of the training sets.
On the other hand, because of rapidly changing conditions, forecast of BG levels needs only to be
accurate over shorter time-scales. It is important to know glycemic dynamics on the order of hours
(not days) to manage the glycemic response of ICU patients. Thus, the test time windows include only
one BG measurement, which is the next BG measurement collected right after the BG measurement
defining the right end point of the corresponding training time window. We follow the same procedure
over the moving time intervals to the end of the whole dataset for each patient. We visually exhibit
this procedure in Fig 2. From a practical point of view, this experiment exhibits a real life situation

Figure 2: This schema shows our experimental design for the ICU setting. Each training time window
has a length of approximately 24 hours, which is used for model estimation. Then, we forecast the first
BG value measured after the training time window. We perform this prediction for the whole dataset
by moving the time windows.

16

in which we use only one day of data for parameter estimation and then perform forecasting for the
next few hours based on the estimated parameters. Such a set-up would be desirable as a support to
glycemic management of these patients.

2.7

Model Evaluation

In this section, we introduce the statistics that we will use to evaluate and compare the forecasting
capability of the models. Let {yi }N
i=1 denote the true BG measurements over the predefined testing time

window for an experiment. Let {ŷi }N
i=1 denote the forecast obtained by a model at the measurement
time points . Note that for a stochastic model, {ŷi }N
i=1 represents the mean of the model output. When

a stochastic model is used, it is natural to obtain a confidence interval as this may be obtained as a
direct consequence of the fact that the model output is in the form of a random variable; such an output
cannot be obtained for an ODE model when parameters are learned through optimization. However,
by using appropriate parameter and state estimation techniques, it may again be possible to obtain a
similar kind of confidence interval for the model output which is in the form of a point-estimate. When
we have probabilistic forecasts we let {i }N
i=1 denote the corresponding standard deviation for each
forecast at the true measurement points so that we can form 1- and 2-stdev bands as [ŷi − i , ŷi + i ]N
i=1

and [ŷi − 2i , ŷi + 2i ]N
i=1 , respectively. Then, for each model, we can compute the percentage of true

measurements, {yi }N
i=1 , that are captured in their respective 1- and 2-stdev bands. These percentages

will be the tools that we will use for evaluation. In addition, we will use standard measures such as

root-mean-squared error (RMSE), mean percentage error (MPE), and Pearson’s correlation coefficient,
(CORR) which are computed as follows.
v
u
N
u1 X
RM SE = t
(yi − ŷi )2 ,
N i=1

MPE =

N
X
|yi − ŷi |
i=1

yi

∗ 100,

N
CORR = corr {yi }N
i=1 , {ŷi }i=1



In addition to these metrics, we compare the forecasting accuracy of this model with other physiologybased mechanistic models. In T2DM setting, we use the longitudinal diabetes pathogenesis model
(LDP), [94] , describing BG dynamics of T2DM patients. In the ICU setting, we use ICU Minimal
Model (ICUMM), introduced in [29, 88] describing BG dynamics of ICU patients. Also, in both settings,
we use simply the mean and variance computed from the respective training data for comparison. We
call this model, mean-variance model. We provide more detail about these models in Sections 3.1.3
and 3.2.3.
Here, by comparing models, we mean comparing their forecasting accuracy. However, both the
LDP model and ICUMM are nonlinear mechanistic models while our model is a linear mechanistic
model. Using these models within predictive algorithms requires computational model estimation to
solve for the best model parameters and states that fit the patient data. A model estimation problem
formulated based on a nonlinear model has multiple minima while the one formulated based on a
linear model generally has a unique minimum that produces the optimal solution to model estimation
problem. However, when there is multiple minima, it is almost impossible to find estimate the global
minimum. Because of these characteristic differences, an absolute comparison between a nonlinear

17

model and a linear model is impossible. Therefore, comparison of prediction accuracy between these
different type of models should be carefully handled. For example, obtaining a smaller error with a
linear model does not imply that this model is better than the nonlinear model, as it is unknown if the
global minimum is reached by the nonlinear model. However, comparing the prediction accuracy is
useful to have a sense of the level of prediction accuracy achieved by these models.

3

Results

In this section, we present results concerning the simple yet interpretable model introduced in this paper;
we now refer to this as the minimal stochastic glucose (MSG) model. The two primary conclusions are
that:
• We obtain BG forecasting results at least as accurate as other established models in both the
T2DM and ICU settings, [88], and the uncertainty bands with which we equip our forecasts play
an important role in this regard;
• We learn a substantial amount about the interpretable parameters within the models, with
possible clinical uses deriving from the parameter estimates, and from tracking them over time,
again using the uncertainty measures that accompany them as measures of confidence.
The combination of simple predictive model and data acquisition accounts for the uncontrolled and
complex nature of the data, including data sparsity, inaccuracy, noisiness, non-stationarity, and biases
resulting from the health care process [17, 21, 95–100], whilst also being interpretable and leading to
patient-specific parameter inference and prediction. Even though the MSG model is relatively simple
it is not always identifiable, given data. For example, having two parameters, γ and β, related to
BG decay rate in the ICU context made it hard to identify these parameters accurately because of
the complexities mentioned above. Despite lack of identifiability of some parameters, parameters as
estimated lead to models which are able to forecast and represent the glucose dynamics. To answer
whether the parameter estimates, forecasts, and uncertainty quantification are good enough to impact
clinical understanding and decision-making or to construct physiologically-anchored phenotypes would
require evaluation, [20, 22, 81] e.g., manual chart review in conjunction with a qualitative trial of
clinical decision-making or a phenotyping analysis respectively. In the absence of these analyses we
will rely on face validity, [101–103], to evaluate effectiveness of the model in representing the dynamics
and in forecasting.

3.1

T2DM

In this setting, our results demonstrate the effectiveness of the MSG model in capturing the patients’
BG dynamics. Specifically the effectiveness is reflected in the estimated parameter values and in
forecasting future BG levels, using these parameters, over time periods of length up to three weeks.

18

3.1.1

Parameter Estimation

Our results exhibit three substantive pieces of evidence that support the validity of the model and its
potential effectiveness for understanding the physiologic state of an individual and forecasting. First,
the estimated model parameter values and their evolution over time are physiologically valid. That
is, the estimated values reflect the patient’s state as evaluated given available data. Moreover, the
evolution of the estimated parameter values over time reflects changes in the patients’ states in a
manner consistent with both the data and what is known about the non-stationary nature of T2DM.
Second, the UQ intervals for the estimated parameters are physiologically plausible and have three
features that make the model potentially useful: (i) relative to the value of the estimated parameter,
the UQ intervals are wide enough to provide information on the reliability of the point estimates,
(ii) the UQ intervals’ evolution over time, demonstrating sensitivity to time and the ability to adapt
to non-stationary patients, and (iii) the UQ intervals are narrow enough to plausibly be used to
differentiate behavior choices, such as carbohydrate consumption. And third, the UQ and parameter
estimation appears to be robust; different estimation methods arrive at similar results. A comparison
of the estimated parameter values and corresponding UQ intervals obtained using optimization and
MCMC are very similar in almost all of the cases, supporting the robustness of the estimates and
relative insensitivity to the estimation methodology. Together, these features imply that with a
reasonable inference scheme, this model could provide useful information for decision-making and a
robust clinical understanding of the patient.
To demonstrate that the estimated parameters are physiologically valid, consider Fig 3 where we
see the point estimates and UQ intervals for all parameters and all three patients obtained with
optimization and MCMC methods. The estimated basal glucose, Gb , values are in the ranges of
∼ 95 − 105 mg/dl, ∼ 105 − 140 mg/dl, and ∼ 105 − 125 mg/dl over the course of four weeks for
patients 1, 2, and 3, respectively. These values are indeed in the expected ranges based on the BG
measurements of these patients.
To show that the UQ intervals are potentially useful in practice, once again consider Fig 3. The
range of UQ intervals for each estimated parameter in most cases contains physiologically plausible
parameter values that are tight enough to enforce the reliability of the point estimates. To quantify
this statement we computed the coefficient of variation, defined as the standard deviation divided by
the mean and can be interpreted as a measure of variability of the point estimator in this context. For
Gb and σ, which are the most influential parameters in characterizing the mean and variance of the
model output, the coefficient of variation is in the ∼ 1 − 5% band and ∼ 4 − 14% band, respectively
for all three patients. These results support the reliability of the point estimates that are used to form
patient-specific models to describe dynamics of each patient.
We can see the robustness of the estimated parameter values by comparing parameter estimates
using two different methods, optimization and MCMC. The results are shown in Fig 3; the upper
and lower panels show parameter estimates using optimization and MCMC, respectively. The point
estimates as well as the corresponding UQ intervals for Gb and σ obtained with optimization and
MCMC are very close to each other in most cases. Some parameters have more variation between
methods; specifically, γ, a, and b do show variation between the results obtained with optimization
and MCMC methods. This variation does not seem to have substantial effect on the model’s ability

19

(a) optimization

(b) optimization

(c) optimization

(d) MCMC

(e) MCMC

(f) MCMC

Figure 3: Parameter estimation and uncertainty quantification in the T2DM setting. The top panel
is obtained with optimization and the bottom panel is obtained with MCMC, both are in a patientspecific manner. It shows that the point estimates obtained with two approaches are very close to
each other in most cases. Also the width of the 1- and 2-stdev intervals, which are obtained with
Laplace approximation (optimization) and directly from the approximate posterior samples (MCMC),
are also in agreement with each other. The parameter estimates and agree with real physiological
values and the non-stationary behavior of the glucose dynamics of T2DM patients is reflected in the
time-evolving behavior of the estimated parameters. All these features enforce the reliability of the
parameter estimation results.
to represent patient dynamics. The overall result is a model whose ability to represent the data is
relatively insensitive to parameter estimation techniques.

20

3.1.2

Forecasting

We evaluate forecasting ability of the model in this setting along two pathways, a face validity pathway
that is mostly motivated by potential clinical decision-making, and a more statistical-based pathway
that is motivated by our desire to be quantitative. In a sense, both evaluations address whether the
data could plausibly be generated by the model.

(a) Model output with BG measurements

(b) KDE - Patient 1

(c) KDE - Patient 2

(d) KDE - Patient 3

Figure 4: On the top row, the model output of the estimated stochastic process is shown over the week
of the training data along with the true BG measurements, and on the bottom row, kernel density
estimate (KDE) of 1,000 different realizations of the estimated model output and BG measurements are
shown for each patient. In (a), the red circles show true BG measurements, the blue curve shows the
mean of the model output, and the gray area represents the estimated 2-stdev band around the mean.
Comparison of the true BG measurements, which are assumed to be a realization of the model output,
with the mean and 2-stdev band of the stochastic process—being the model output—along with the
KDE plots in (b)-(d) implies that BG measurements could indeed be considered as a realizations of
the random process.
The first evaluation—face validity—is to consider whether the model can capture the dynamics
qualitatively. Because the model’s forecast is in the form of a distribution, the forecast we have to
evaluate is anchored to the mean and standard deviation. In Figs 4a and 5, the red circles are the
BG measurements and from our modeling perspective are also a realization of the stochastic process
whose mean is shown by the blue curve and variance is represented by the gray region. Fig 4a shows
the training time window for one of the patients and Figs 5a-5c show the test time window for each
patient. An initial inspection of these figures implies that the model output seems to represent the
21

data well. One important and challenging task of a forecast is accurate estimation of uncertainty.
Because of the idiosyncrasy of our stochastic model, uncertainty is quantified naturally using the
covariance function of the model process. Fig 5 demonstrates the model’s effectiveness in capturing
relevant forecast uncertainty with two standard deviation (2-stdev) bands around the model mean;
these bands capture most of the future BG measurement. These results are further quantified in Table
3 that shows summary statistics for how often the future measurements were captured by the 2-stdev
bands. Being able to contain ∼ 89 − 97% of the true BG measurements in these confidence regions
for all three patients is an indicator of this model’s predictive capability. Because of more dangerous

consequences of hypoglycemia, we also check the percentage of measurements that are smaller than
the lower 2-stdev band, i.e., missed by the 2-stdev band on the lower-end, over the test time window,
which are 1.79% (four measurements out of 224 total BG measurements), 0%, and 0% for patient 1,
2, and 3, respectively. These four measurements for patient 1 are 88, 94, 102, and 118 mg/dl, and
the lower bound of the 2-stdev band for these measurements are estimated to be 94, 99, 105, and
123 mg/dl. Also, this patient had total of 31 BG measurements in the range of 68-88 mg/d, and the
estimated 2-stdev band missed only one of BG measurements (88 mg/dl) in that range and estimated
the possibility of occurrence of all the remaining ones. This result shows that model could provide
decision support for the possible occurrence of hypoglycemia. Thus, this model is providing substantial
forecasting information beyond what is available given the data alone.
The second evaluation quantifies how plausible it is that the data we observe could have originated
from the model. We quantify this plausibility using the two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test.
To start, Fig 4b-4d show the kernel density estimates (KDEs) obtained from the BG measurements
(red curve) and from 1,000 independent realizations of the estimated stochastic process (blue curves)
over the training time window for each patient. The KDEs in Fig 4b-4d support the idea that the
BG measurements could be assumed to be drawn from the distribution given by the estimated model
output. To perform the two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test we created datasets by resampling
10,000 independent realizations of the model output at the BG measurement times and performed the
test using each generated sample against BG measurements with the kstest2 function in MATLAB with
1% significance level. We performed this procedure over one-week of training window and three-week
of test window for each patient separately. Note that the null hypothesis states that the two samples
are drawn from the same distribution and not rejecting the null hypothesis supports that our model
could accurately represent the distribution of the measurements. Moreover, the null hypothesis here is
a distributional one so that re-ordering measurements or forecasts will have no effect on the KS test.
Out of 10,000 different samples in each case, the rejection rates were 0.55%, 0.02%, and 0.59%
over the training time window and they were 1.65%, 67.54%, and 0.38% over the test time window,
respectively for patients 1, 2, and 3. First, observe that the rejection rates are much smaller over the
training time window. This is expected as the random samples used against the BG measurements in
the KS test are generated by the model output estimated using the same BG measurements. However,
the model output used to generate samples over the test time window was obtained only using the
patient-specific model, which is trained by the training data and nutrition intake data of those patients
over the test time window. Therefore, even though we have a high rejection rate for patient 2 over the
test time window, those much smaller numbers for patients 1 and 3 are still reassuring and show that

22

(a) Patient 1

(b) Patient 2

(c) Patient 3

Figure 5: Forecasting results in the T2DM setting obtained via models formed by using the estimated
parameters with the optimization approach. In each plot, the red circles show the true BG measurements,
the blue curve shows the mean of the model output, and the gray region is the estimated 2-stdev
band around the mean of the model output. These forecasting results show that the proposed model
mean, when equipped with confidence bands found from standard deviations, estimate the BG levels
accurately, and in a patient specific way. This reinforces the claim that the model parameters could be
used to provide information about the health condition of individual patients.

23

our initial assumption, which is that our simplified stochastic model can describe the BG values, is a
valid assumption in this setting.
While the KS test establishes the distributional similarity between the data and our fitted model,
we also evaluate pointwise correlations to establish the validity of the model’s predicted dynamics; i.e.,
responses to meals. We report the Pearson correlation coefficients in Table 3, and show substantial
positive correlation. This indicates that our model is superior to a constant statistical model of the
data distribution.
Finally, we see from Fig 5b that the mean of the model output exhibits unusually high peak BG
values after the meals. In addition, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test has a high rejection rate for this
patient. Investigation of parameter values shown in Fig 3a-3c reveals that there is an order of magnitude
difference between estimated gamma values for patient 2 and for patients 1 and 3. Since γ represents
the decay rate to the patient’s basal glucose value, we hypothesized the reason for not estimating
the gamma parameter accurately for this patient could be related to their BG measurement pattern.
To investigate, we checked the time difference between the recorded meal times and the first BG
measurement times after each meal. We found that patient 2 had 18 meals over their training time
window and that time difference was exactly 2 hours for each meal. Patients 1 and 3 had variability
among their measurement times. We believe such a regular measurement pattern without any variability
is the reason for not being able to estimate the gamma parameter, representing the decay rate to
the basal glucose value. In addition, we believe this is also the reason for the high rejection rate for
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for patient 2. We provide more detail about the BG measurement pattern of
these patients in the Supplementary Material.
3.1.3

Comparison of Forecasting Accuracy with Longitudinal Diabetes Pathogenesis
Model

In this section, we compare the forecasting accuracy of the T2DM version of the MSG model with a
well-known model, the longitudinal diabetes pathogenesis (LDP) model developed by Ha & Sherman
[94] and a simple mean-variance model. The LDP model is developed to understand different pathways
of T2DM pathogenesis. It represents the metabolic state of T2DM patients at any time during
the disease progression over years. The model consists of four differential equations and 11 model
parameters. We do not attempt to estimate all these parameters as it is not feasible with the available
sparse data. We perform the same forecasting task by estimating three different sets of parameters,
{σ, SI}, {σ, SI, hepaSI}, {σ, SI, hepaSI, r20}, and setting the remaining parameters at known default

values.

The experiment in this setting will be the same as described above in Section 3.1.2. For a fair
comparison, mean-variance model corresponds simply to computing the sample mean and variance
from the training data and to using the mean as the point estimator over the test time window and
the variance for uncertainty quantification in the forecast. On the other hand, the LDP model consists
of a set of coupled ODEs. To estimate the unknown model parameters and forecast BG levels with the
LDP model we used the constrained Ensemble Kalman Filter (EnKF) algorithm, [104]. We coded the
algorithm on MATLAB for parameter estimation and BG forecasting using the constrained EnKF method
based on the LDP model. We used MATLAB’s ODE solver ode23 to solve the LDP model numerically.

24

MSG Model
σ, SI
LDP Model σ, SI, hepaSI
σ, SI, hepaSI, r20
Mean-Variance Model

MSG Model
σ, SI
LDP Model σ, SI, hepaSI
σ, SI, hepaSI, r20
Mean-Variance Model

MSG Model
σ, SI
LDP Model σ, SI, hepaSI
σ, SI, hepaSI, r20
Mean-Variance Model

Patient 1
1-std % 2-std %
75.45
93.30
41.96
65.62
40.18
66.96
43.30
65.62
73.66
95.98
Patient 2
1-std % 2-std %
63.29
89.24
20.89
37.34
15.82
32.91
18.35
33.54
68.99
90.51
Patient 3
1-std % 2-std %
51.61
96.77
29.03
50.00
30.65
53.23
19.35
46.77
58.07
95.16

RMSE
20.12
22.89
22.00
22.09
24.48

MPE
12.97
13.72
13.77
13.59
16.97

CORR
0.5680
0.5090
0.4995
0.5737
0

RMSE
33.52
39.54
44.18
40.38
35.54

MPE
17.35
21.00
24.20
21.71
18.17

CORR
0.3674
0.3122
0.3019
0.3536
0

RMSE
24.27
32.20
32.88
33.43
26.96

MPE
17.12
18.98
18.69
19.81
18.74

CORR
0.4759
0.3750
0.4032
0.4019
0

Table 3: Comparison of the forecasting results with three different models. For each different case of
the LDP model the results in the corresponding row shows which parameters are estimated during the
whole forecasting experiment. We obtain better forecasting accuracy with the MSG model than with
the LDP model and mean-variance model, in general. Furthermore, for the LDP model, the forecasting
accuracy decreases as the number of parameters being estimated increases.
Note that we use the constrained EnKF algorithm because it is validated to provide accurate
forecasting results with complex ODE models [104]. Moreover, the ensembles of state estimates could
be used for uncertainty quantification. However using a filtering algorithm requires exploiting all the
data collected up until the forecasting time point; unlike the optimization algorithm paired with MSG
model, which could use data collected only over the training time window to train the model and then
simulate over the test time window for forecasting. Note that with LDP model - EnKF algorithm
pair, we used all the data contained in the training and test time windows. Then, we used the BG
forecasting values over the test time window for comparison. The comparison results are shown in
Table 3.
The results in Table 3 show that the MSG model provides better accuracy in forecasting future BG
levels in T2DM patients than all variants of the LDP model and mean-variance model when compared
holistically.
First, MSG model achieves smaller RMSE and MPE than all different variations of the LDP model
and mean-variance model for all three patients, demonstrating that mean of the MSG model output is
also preferable as a point estimator.
Second, we see the advantage of using a stochastic model which inherently quantifies the level of
certainty in the BG predictions. It is worth noting that the MSG model is based on learning parameters
of a stochastic model, whilst the LDP quantifies uncertainties by learning an ensemble of parameters

25

and states; this may contribute to the differences between them at the level of uncertainty prediction.
The percentages in Table 3 show that the MSG model is substantially better than the LDP model in
capturing the true measurements in the corresponding confidence bands whereas it is not as good as
mean-variance model for these percentages. Nevertheless, the comparison of the correlation values
over the test time window supports the better forecasting accuracy with the MSG model. In summary
the MSG model is preferable to the LDP and mean-variance models for decision making within the
context we use here, as it possesses the good features when compared with different type of models.
When compared with a mechanistic model as itself (the LDP model here), the MSG model gives a
better point forecasts and better confidence bands, enabling knowledge of possible high and low values
for future BG levels. On the other hand, when compared with the most simple data driven model, it
still provides better overall forecasting accuracy.

3.2

ICU

We now move to the more complex and difficult case of modeling and forecasting glycemic dynamics
in the ICU, where non-stationarity is manifest on much shorter time-scales. Parameter estimation and
forecasting are, in general, harder in the ICU context because of the characteristics of ICU patients as
explained in Section 2.1. A detailed explanation about how the MSG model represent the dynamics in
ICU setting is provided in the Supplementary Material.
3.2.1

Parameter Estimation

The difficulties presented in the ICU setting are reflected in our parameter estimation results. Despite
these complexities, our results exhibit four substantive pieces of evidence which support the validity
of the model and its potential effectiveness for understanding the physiological state of ICU patients
and for forecasting. First, the model captures the dynamics reflected in the parameter estimates with
sparse data. Second, the estimated model parameters, which have the most influence in resolving the
mean and variance of the BG level, are physiologically valid in most of the cases. Third, the changes in
the parameter estimation results over moving time windows are realistic and reflective of the expected
non-stationary behavior of ICU patients. And fourth, the UQ results show that the parameters (basal
glucose rate, Gb and the model standard deviation, σ), which have the most influence in resolving
mean and variance of BG levels are estimated with more certainty. Having tighter bands around the
point estimates for these parameters indicates the robustness of the estimation. We explain these
claims in detail in the following paragraphs. Fig 6 contains evidence supporting all these results and
Table 2 shows the sparsity of the BG measurements.
With the complexity of ICU data in mind, consider the parameter estimation results. Figure 6
shows the parameter estimates over moving time windows with length of 24 hr for each ICU patient
obtained with MCMC approach. The mean of each chain is shown using blue stars. These parameter
estimates are physiologically plausible for all three patients except in a small number of cases. For
example, estimates of the basal glucose rate, Gb , were around ∼ 105 − 145mg/dl, ∼ 140 − 180mg/dl,
∼ 135 − 210mg/dl, for patients 4, 5, and 6, respectively, all plausible values given the patient’s data.

As shown in the Supplementary Material, it was not possible to compute good estimates for parameters

26

(a) patient 4

(b) patient 5

(c) patient 6

Figure 6: Parameter estimation and uncertainty quantification results in the ICU setting obtained
with MCMC. In each plot, the blue stars are the point-estimate of each parameter and the gray area
is the 2-stdev band around the point-estimates (both obtained from the resulting random samples).
The estimated model parameters exhibit biophysically realistic values. Also, 1- and 2-stdev bands
enforces the reliability of the estimated parameters, especially, Gb and σ, which are the most influential
parameters in predicting the mean and variance of BG levels.

27

γ and β in some of the cases.
Fig 6 also shows that the time evolution of the estimated parameters is realistic within the ICU context.
In ICU the training time windows move in positive (increasing time) direction of measurements—given
a measurement the model is estimated using the previous 24 hours of data, ∼ 14 data points to forecast
the future measurement whenever it comes—so that the consecutive time windows have an overlap
of 20-23 hours. This means that the model varies relatively continuously between consecutive time
windows. This relative continuity is reflected in Fig 6 that shows the time evolution of estimated
parameters for all three patients. Even though the health condition of the ICU patients can change
rapidly, the estimated parameters do not change wildly (in most of the cases), reflecting the expectation
under these settings. Nevertheless, the patients are clearly non-stationary and the observed evolution
of the parameter estimates, shown in Fig 6, reflects this non-stationarity.
And finally, as was the case in the T2DM setting, the model is relatively robust to the methods used
to estimate it; however, as can be inferred from the discussion above about parameters and their face
validity to physiology, the ICU formulation of the model can have more complex parameter estimation
issues compared to the T2DM setting. In particular, in the ICU setting there are some cases where
the Laplace approximation does not work well because the parameter misfit solution surface is flat in
some parameter directions – a reflection of identifiability issues. We provide more insight about this
issue in Supplementary Material. Even though the point estimates for each patient and parameter pair
by MCMC and optimization are close to each other, since UQ results are more meaningful by MCMC,
we present the plots obtained by MCMC. In general we observe that Gb and σ, both allow for more
robust estimation compared to the estimation of γ and β. The robustness of the estimation of Gb and
σ is important for clinical applications because the mean and variance are what is used for glycemic
management. As a demonstration of the robustness of Gb and σ, consider Fig 6. Here we can see the
2-stdev band around the mean for Gb and σ is tighter than the 2-stdev bands for γ and β for all three
patients. Remember that both γ and β are related to the glucose removal rate from the blood. This
is, perhaps, an indicator of an identifiability issue for these parameters. But it is also true that we
are indeed less certain about this physiology; glucose can be removed at different rates by different
physiological processes, e.g., liver versus adipose tissue, and we are not resolving these physiological
subsystems. Moreover, due to the non-stationary and sparse nature of the data in the ICU setting, it
is harder to estimate some of the model parameters accurately. Separating these inference issues is not
possible given the data presently collected in these settings. Nevertheless, the parameters that play a
key role in resolving the mean and variance of the BG dynamics can be estimated accurately up to the
desired level.
3.2.2

Forecasting

Forecasting results in the ICU setting are indicative of two major features of this model: (i) we can
capture the trend of BG measurements through the mean of the model and (ii) we can estimate the
variance of the BG measurements accurately. Once again, since resolving mean and variance of BG
dynamics is central to glycemic management, these results show potential usefulness of this model in
the ICU context.
Fig 7 demonstrates that the forecasted mean of the model output encapsulates the essence of the

28

(a) patient 4

(b) patient 5

(c) patient 6

Figure 7: Forecasting results obtained based on parameters estimated with MCMC, in the ICU setting.
In each plot, the red circles show the true BG measurements, the blue stars show the mean of the
model output, and the gray region shows the 2-stdev band around this mean. These results are, in
general, very close to those obtained using the optimization approach, and the most relevant properties
are shared by them both. Obtaining similar results with another numerical solution technique based
on the same mechanistic model shows the reliability of the model and estimated model parameters.

29

behavior of BG measurements for all three patients. In each of the plots in Fig 7, the red circles show
the BG measurements, the blue stars are the mean of the model, and the gray region is the 2-stdev
band around the mean, each one obtained separately with the corresponding patient-specific model.
To observe the effectiveness of this model in estimating the variance of the BG measurements
accurately, consider Fig 7 and Table 4. Fig 7 shows the ability of the model to estimate the variance
in glycemic dynamics visually where a large number of true BG measurements are contained in the
gray regions that represent the forecasted 2-stdev bands around the forecasted mean. These results are
quantified in Table 4 which contains summary statistics both for optimization and MCMC methods
and demonstrate the forecasting accuracy of the MSG model and imply potential use in the ICU for
glycemic management. Note that given the forecast, data, and the fundamental challenges of the
ICU setting, we should expect forecast UQ bands to be quite large. But, this does not mean it is not
valuable to clinicians but rather means that we can provide a realistic estimate of the uncertainty in
an extremely volatile and poorly measured system.
3.2.3

Comparison of Forecasting Accuracy With The ICU Minimal Model

In this section, we use the ICUMM and mean-variance model in a similar manner as in T2DM context
for the comparison of the forecasting results. The ICUMM is a physiological model that represents the
glucose-insulin dynamics of ICU patients and was developed to be used for glycemic management in
ICU. The model consists of four coupled differential equations and has 12 model parameters. One of
those model parameters is used for the purpose of having units equal on both sides of the equation and
set to 1. Two of the model parameters represent the volume of glucose and insulin distribution space
and are set to nominal values from the literature. This leaves us with nine unknown model parameters
to be estimated. For parameter estimation and BG forecasting, we used the constrained EnKF method,
which enables us to obtain confidence bands for the forecasting results using the ensembles. We
implemented the BG forecasting algorithm using the EnKF method based on the ICUMM on MATLAB.
We used MATLAB’s ODE solver ode45 to obtain the solution of ICUMM. The mean-variance model
simply uses the mean and variance of BG measurements over the training time window for forecasting.
The comparison results are shown in Table 4. These results indicate the efficiency of the MSG model
in forecasting BG measurements and assessing the uncertainty in the forecasted values.
First, the point estimators in the MSG case exhibit comparable, or improved, accuracy in comparison
to the ICUMM and mean-variance model, i.e., RMSE and MPE are smaller for the MSG model
obtained either via optimization or MCMC. In addition, correlation values obtained with the MSG
model are significantly larger than those with the ICUMM and mean-variance model. These results
show that with a relatively simple model, we are able to reach the same, or better, accuracy in
forecasting BG behavior than a more physiologically based high-fidelity model, with a larger number
of unknown model parameters.
Second, the confidence bands that we use to quantify possible high and low values of BG level
could provide better results than ICUMM. Compared to ICUMM, the improved accuracy of the MSG
model in terms of uncertainty forecasting may be related, in part, to the fact that the model we use
is inherently stochastic, and fits the stochastic fluctuations to data; in contrast, ICUMM provides
uncertainty bands only through the ensemble of solutions which are a product of the algorithm used to

30

optimization
MSG Model
MCMC
ICUMM
Mean-Variance Model

optimization
MSG Model
MCMC
ICUMM
Mean-Variance Model

optimization
MSG Model
MCMC
ICUMM
Mean-Variance Model

Patient 4
1-std % 2-std %
56.14
89.47
60.82
91.81
45.61
80.12
59.06
94.15
Patient 5
1-std % 2-std %
58.65
83.97
64.14
88.19
29.54
53.59
64.14
89.87
Patient 6
1-std % 2-std %
59.04
87.45
63.84
91.14
18.45
38.01
63.84
91.14

RMSE
17.27
18.60
17.35
18.07

MPE
10.29
11.07
9.87
10.96

CORR
0.3177
0.2341
0.3232
0.1753

RMSE
33.27
30.95
34.45
31.79

MPE
18.91
18.51
18.81
19.06

CORR
0.2751
0.2773
0.1427
0.1737

RMSE
43.16
44.78
44.77
46.66

MPE
25.22
27.12
26.18
28.04

CORR
0.2859
0.1859
0.1374
0.1231

Table 4: Comparison of the forecasting results obtained with the MSG, ICUMM and mean-variance
models. The percentages of 1- and 2-stdev bands that capture the true BG measurements with the
MSG model is substantially higher than the ICUMM whereas they are smaller than mean-variance
model. On the other hand, RMSE and MPE values are closer when comparing all three models, yet
the MSG model still provides smaller values for these measures, as well. In addition, the forecasted BG
levels by MSG model gives the highest correlation with the BG measurements for all three patients.
fit the data, and not inherent to the model itself. On the other hand, these 2-stdev bands contain
only slightly larger number of BG measurements with mean-variance model compared to MSG model.
Even though mean-variance model provides better results with respect to this evaluation metric, it
gives larger RMSE and MPE and much smaller correlation between the BG measurements. Besides,
the mean-variance model does not provide any physiological understanding of the system.
In summary, a comprehensive comparison of MSG model with a more complex physiology-based
mechanistic model and a simpler data-driven model suggests that the MSG model, a mechanistic
model with small number of parameters, works at least as good as, if not better than, these models in
representing BG behavior and forecasting future BG levels in the ICU setting.

4

Discussion and Conclusion

Summary of the modeling framework: In this paper, we introduce a new mathematical model
of the glucose regulatory system in humans. The model was created with five goals in mind: (i) the
model should be robustly identifiable/estimable and verifiable with real world human data [105]—data
collected for health management—such that the model could potentially be useful for personalized
parameter estimation and state forecasting [105]; (ii) the model should be interpretable in the sense
that patient specific parameters may be used to explain, and quantify basic physiological mechanisms;
(iii) the model should be physiologically simple, even if the model is functionally complex, to minimize
parameter identifiability problems present in many existing physiological models; (iv) a model framework
31

generalizable and adaptable to several contexts including T2DM and ICU; and (v) a model that was
amenable to a model-based control environment. With these goals driving the model development, our
model follows different approach, as explained in Section 2.2 compared to many other glucose-insulin
modeling efforts. The most important departure of our model compared with others is the inclusion
of insulin as a lumped parameter affecting the glucose state rather than as an independent state or
state(s). We formulated the model this way because, in clinical settings, insulin is rarely measured,
and therefore difficult to estimate.
Model development constrained by real world data: Restricting model development to the
constraints imposed by readily available real world data is a severe, but important, restriction. To
be directly useful in applications, models must be estimable using data that are collected within
the context of the given application, and these data are almost always much more sparse than ideal
laboratory experiments. To circumnavigate these problems, we are forced to use data collected to
manage health and the models that can be applied with these data will likely be different than models
built to be estimable with, e.g., laboratory data. Therefore, to help facilitate the circular process of
allowing our knowledge of systems physiology to inform and impact how clinicians manage the health
of people, we need a bridge between these worlds, and the bridge proposed here is through inference
with data based on simple yet interpretable models.
Including insulin in a mechanistic modeling framework: There are, at a high level, two
pathways for estimating and modeling blood glucose behavior. First, one can include dynamic equations
for glucose and insulin, along with other related processes. Second, one can include a dynamic equation
for glucose that includes a parameterized function capturing the impact of insulin on glucose that is
not dynamic. The second option excludes a model equation for insulin and instead has a parameterized
function that represents the impact of glucose on insulin that is hypothesized to exist. The most
common tactic is the first approach. However, as we emphasized before, insulin measurements rarely
exist in any practical setting and insulin levels are not interpretable or meaningful for patients or for
most clinicians. This implies that modeling glucose together with insulin leaves one of two primary
variables free to vary, causing the system to be ill-posed and not identifiable. In contrast, the second
option does not have these pathologies, will be uniquely estimable under most circumstances, and will
provide a more stable forecast.
Blood glucose variability and its effect on uncertainty quantification: Both in T2DM and
ICU settings, we obtain the forecasted mean and 2-stdev bands around this mean as our model output.
The characteristics of BG behavior, in particular BG variability, affect the width of the 2-stdev bands in
these two settings. It is natural to expect to have wider bands in the ICU setting because of the highly
non-stationary BG behavior of ICU patients. However, there are other factors affecting the width of
these bands. First, BG measurements are relatively dense in the ICU, compared to T2DM. The second
factor is the difference between the experiments that were designed according to the specific needs of
each setting, which is depicted in Fig 1 and 2. Using the latest 24-hour data for model estimation
and forecasting in the ICU setting could help reduce uncertainty in the forecasts and may result in
occasional more narrow 2-stdev bands. In addition, the GM is performed by clinicians in ICU and
by patients in the T2DM setting. A clinician’s management is likely to reduce the variability in BG
behavior, which can be reflected in the width of the estimated 2-stdev bands.

32

Impact of the nutrition function choice in the ICU context: We also considered a different
form for the nutrition function in the ICU setting to test robustness of our modeling to the simplistic
piecewise constant meal function that we adopt in this case. Because ICU patients are tube-fed with
nutrition quantities that are considerably less than a healthy individual would ingest, per unit time,
it is reasonable to consider the use of a piecewise constant function. Nonetheless we investigated if
modifying the piecewise constant function as shown in Fig 8 could improve the parameter estimation
and/or forecasting results. Using this function introduces two more parameters to be estimated in the
ICU setting, increasing the flexibility and the complexity at the same time. Hence the parameters to
be estimated are Gb , γ, σ, β, a, b. Using this function modeling the nutrition delivery did not improve
the forecast accuracy which lead us to use the simpler version of the model.

Figure 8: Smoothing piecewise constant nutrition function that is used for ICU patients
The function shown on the right hand side of Fig 8 is formulated as follows:

m(t) =

Km
X

k=1

(m)

ck ((1 − e−a(t−tk

(m)
−ahk

+ (1 − e
(m)

where hk

(m+1)

:= tk

(m)

− tk

)

)1[t(m) ,t(m) ) (t)
k

)(2 − e

k+1

(m+1)
b(t−tk
)

(24)
)1[t(m+1) ,t(m) + ln(2) ] (t)),
k

k+1

b

and
(m)

ck :=

dk hk
(m)

hk

(m)

(m)

+ (e−ahk /a) + (1 − e−ahk )((2ln(2) − 1)/b)

,

is the normalizing constant for k = 1, 2, ..., Km .
Outlook: The model we have developed has demonstrable predictive capability and discriminates
between datasets in a patient-specific manner. Yet it has some limitations, which give space for future
development, and also suggests some natural next-step applications. We outline a number of possible
future directions.
Glycemic control: Given the MSG model construction, an obvious next step is to formulate the
work on the control problem where we determine estimates of the input ranges of nutrition and insulin,
necessary to keep the output, here BG, in a desired target range.
Phenotyping: Because the parameters of the MSG model are interpretable and track physiology
reasonable well, we could potentially use the model parameter estimates for phenotyping studies, [20,

33

22, 81]. Meaning, we could estimate parameter for individuals in a given health state, establishing an
inferred phenotype for the patient, and then relate this phenotype to other external health features
or cluster the patient phenotypes in an effort to find structure among the inferred physiology. We
have deemed efforts such as this high-fidelity phenotyping [97] and believe that this model has the
potential to be used to these ends. For example, one of the clinical criteria to diagnose diabetes is
fasting blood glucose levels higher than 126 mg/dl, where fasting is defined as no caloric intake at
least eight hours. We intend to understand the relationship between the fasting blood glucose level
and our model parameter, Gb , the basal glucose value. The existence of such relationship could show
us if Gb is useful to identify diabetes.
Further model generalization to include other glucose-data driven situations: We have not investigated
how the MSG model might work given oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) data. The OGTT is one of
the standard settings for glucose-insulin model development and potential use; we know of only one
model that currently generalized to both OGTT and clinical data [10] and we would like to add the
MSG model to this list.
T1DM: We have an initial version of the MSG model that could be used within T1DM setting. It
would be interest to test this version on T1DM data. Since the time-scales of health progression here
are more similar to those of T2DM than the ICU setting, giving hope that the method might have
similar predictive capability in this setting. While MSG model may not outperform current T1DM
ODE models for short-term glucose forecasting or control, it may useful for performing larger-scale,
longitudinal patient phenotyping. Because of not having access to such a T1DM dataset, we have
not been able to work with this version in this paper. We plan to pursue a number of the research
directions outlined here in the immediate future.

References
[1] Gerold M Grodsky. “A threshold distribution hypothesis for packet storage of insulin and its
mathematical modeling”. In: The Journal of clinical investigation 51.8 (1972), pp. 2047–2059.
[2] Richard N Bergman et al. “Quantitative estimation of insulin sensitivity.” In: American Journal
of Physiology-Endocrinology And Metabolism 236.6 (1979), E667.
[3] Jiaxu Li et al. “The range of time delay and the global stability of the equilibrium for an
IVGTT model”. In: Mathematical biosciences 235.2 (2012), pp. 128–137.
[4] Xiangyun Shi et al. “Analysis of a stochastic IVGTT glucose-insulin model with time delay”.
In: Mathematical Biosciences and Engineering 17.3 (2020), pp. 2310–2329.
[5] Jeppe Sturis et al. “Computer model for mechanisms underlying ultradian oscillations of insulin
and glucose”. In: American Journal of Physiology-Endocrinology And Metabolism 260.5 (1991),
E801–E809.
[6] Jiaxu Li and Yang Kuang. “Analysis of a model of the glucose-insulin regulatory system with
two delays”. In: SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics 67.3 (2007), pp. 757–776.
[7] Weijiu Liu, ChingChun Hsin, and Fusheng Tang. “A molecular mathematical model of glucose
mobilization and uptake”. In: Mathematical biosciences 221.2 (2009), pp. 121–129.
34

[8] Brian Topp et al. “A model of β-cell mass, insulin, and glucose kinetics: pathways to diabetes”.
In: Journal of theoretical biology 206.4 (2000), pp. 605–619.
[9] Alessandro Bertuzzi, Serenella Salinari, and Geltrude Mingrone. “Insulin granule trafficking
in b-cells: mathematical model of glucose-induced insulin secretion”. In: American Journal of
Physiology-Endocrinology and Metabolism (2007).
[10] Joon Ha, Leslie S Satin, and Arthur S Sherman. “A mathematical model of the pathogenesis,
prevention, and reversal of type 2 diabetes”. In: Endocrinology 157.2 (2015), pp. 624–635.
[11] Pranay Goel. “Insulin resistance or hypersecretion? The βIG picture revisited”. In: Journal of
theoretical biology 384 (2015), pp. 131–139.
[12] Chiara Dalla Man, Robert A Rizza, and Claudio Cobelli. “Meal simulation model of the glucoseinsulin system”. In: IEEE Transactions on biomedical engineering 54.10 (2007), pp. 1740–
1749.
[13] ED Lehmann and T Deutsch. “A physiological model of glucose-insulin interaction in type 1
diabetes mellitus”. In: Journal of biomedical engineering 14.3 (1992), pp. 235–242.
[14] David M Eddy and Leonard Schlessinger. “Archimedes: a trial-validated model of diabetes”. In:
Diabetes care 26.11 (2003), pp. 3093–3101.
[15] Andrea Mari et al. “Mathematical modeling for the physiological and clinical investigation of
glucose homeostasis and diabetes”. In: Frontiers in Physiology 11 (2020), p. 1548.
[16] Steven E Kahn et al. “The contribution of insulin-dependent and insulin-independent glucose
uptake to intravenous glucose tolerance in healthy human subjects”. In: Diabetes 43.4 (1994),
pp. 587–592.
[17] George Hripcsak, David J Albers, and Adler Perotte. “Exploiting time in electronic health record
correlations”. In: Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 18.Supplement 1
(2011), pp. i109–i115.
[18] D. J. Albers and G. Hripcsak. “Using time-delayed mutual information to discover and interpret
temporal correlation structure in complex populations”. In: CHAOS 22 (2012), p. 013111.
[19] David J Albers and George Hripcsak. “Estimation of time-delayed mutual information and bias
for irregularly and sparsely sampled time-series”. In: Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 45.6 (2012),
pp. 853–860.
[20] David J Albers, George Hripcsak, and Michael Schmidt. “Population physiology: leveraging
electronic health record data to understand human endocrine dynamics”. In: PLoS One 7.12
(2012), e48058.
[21] George Hripcsak and David J Albers. “Correlating electronic health record concepts with
healthcare process events”. In: Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 20.e2
(2013), e311–e318.
[22] David J Albers et al. “Dynamical phenotyping: using temporal analysis of clinically collected
physiologic data to stratify populations”. In: PloS one 9.6 (2014), e96443.

35

[23] Bum Ju Lee and Jong Yeol Kim. “Identification of type 2 diabetes risk factors using phenotypes
consisting of anthropometry and triglycerides based on machine learning”. In: IEEE journal of
biomedical and health informatics 20.1 (2015), pp. 39–46.
[24] Gang Luo. “Automatically explaining machine learning prediction results: a demonstration on
type 2 diabetes risk prediction”. In: Health information science and systems 4.1 (2016), pp. 1–9.
[25] Brett Kreigh Beaulieu-Jones. “Machine Learning Methods to Identify Hidden Phenotypes in
the Electronic Health Record”. PhD thesis. University of Pennsylvania, 2017.
[26] Hasan T Abbas et al. “Predicting long-term type 2 diabetes with support vector machine using
oral glucose tolerance test”. In: Plos one 14.12 (2019), e0219636.
[27] Leila Ismail et al. “Type 2 diabetes with artificial intelligence machine learning: methods and
evaluation”. In: Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering 29.1 (2022), pp. 313–333.
[28] Madineh Sedigh-Sarvestani, David J Albers, and Bruce J Gluckman. “Data assimilation of
glucose dynamics for use in the intensive care unit”. In: 2012 Annual International Conference
of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE. 2012, pp. 5437–5440.
[29] Tom Van Herpe et al. “A minimal model for glycemia control in critically ill patients”. In: 2006
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE. 2006,
pp. 5432–5435.
[30] J Lin et al. “Adaptive bolus-based set-point regulation of hyperglycemia in critical care”. In:
The 26th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society. Vol. 2. IEEE. 2004, pp. 3463–3466.
[31] Jessica Lin et al. “A physiological Intensive Control Insulin-Nutrition-Glucose (ICING) model
validated in critically ill patients”. In: Computer methods and programs in biomedicine 102.2
(2011), pp. 192–205.
[32] Ari Pritchard-Bell et al. “Modeling glucose and subcutaneous insulin dynamics in critical care”.
In: Control Engineering Practice 58 (2017), pp. 268–275.
[33] Timothy D Knab, Gilles Clermont, and Robert S Parker. “A “Virtual Patient” Cohort and
Mathematical Model of Glucose Dynamics in Critical Care”. In: IFAC-PapersOnLine 49.26
(2016), pp. 1–7.
[34] Anirban Roy and Robert S Parker. “A phenomenological model of plasma FFA, glucose, and
insulin concentrations during rest and exercise”. In: Proceedings of the 2010 American Control
Conference. IEEE. 2010, pp. 5161–5166.
[35] Timothy D Knab, Gilles Clermont, and Robert S Parker. “Zone model predictive control and
moving horizon estimation for the regulation of blood glucose in critical care patients”. In:
IFAC-PapersOnLine 48.8 (2015), pp. 1002–1007.
[36] Michael Vilkhovoy et al. “A control-relevant model of subcutaneous insulin absorption”. In:
IFAC Proceedings Volumes 47.3 (2014), pp. 10988–10993.

36

[37] Niels Haverbeke et al. “Nonlinear model predictive control with moving horizon state and
disturbance estimation-application to the normalization of blood glucose in the critically ill”.
In: IFAC Proceedings Volumes 41.2 (2008), pp. 9069–9074.
[38] Robert S Parker, Timothy D Knab, and Gilles Clermont. “The Impact of a Responsive Endogenous Pancreas in Critical Care Glucose Control”. In: 2018 Annual American Control Conference
(ACC). IEEE. 2018, pp. 3595–3601.
[39] Yan Zhang, Tim A Holt, and Natalia Khovanova. “A data driven nonlinear stochastic model
for blood glucose dynamics”. In: Computer methods and programs in biomedicine 125 (2016),
pp. 18–25.
[40] Shaun Davidson et al. “Multi-input stochastic prediction of insulin sensitivity for tight glycaemic
control using insulin sensitivity and blood glucose data”. In: Computer methods and programs
in biomedicine 182 (2019), p. 105043.
[41] Jessica Lin et al. “Stochastic modelling of insulin sensitivity and adaptive glycemic control for
critical care”. In: Computer methods and programs in biomedicine 89.2 (2008), pp. 141–152.
[42] Jessica Lin et al. “Stochastic modelling of insulin sensitivity variability in critical care”. In:
Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 1.3 (2006), pp. 229–242.
[43] Aaron J Le Compte et al. “Blood glucose prediction using stochastic modeling in neonatal
intensive care”. In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 57.3 (2009), pp. 509–518.
[44] Shaun M Davidson et al. “Virtual patient trials of a multi-input stochastic model for tight
glycaemic control using insulin sensitivity and blood glucose data”. In: Biomedical Signal
Processing and Control 59 (2020), p. 101896.
[45] Anne Katrine Duun-Henriksen et al. “Model identification using stochastic differential equation
grey-box models in diabetes”. In: Journal of diabetes science and technology 7.2 (2013), pp. 431–
440.
[46] Paolo Brunetti, Marco Orsini Federici, and Massimo Massi Benedetti. “The Artificial Pancreas”.
In: Artificial Cells, Blood Substitutes, and Biotechnology 31.2 (2003), pp. 127–138. doi: 10.
1081 / BIO - 120020169. eprint: https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1081 / BIO - 120020169. url: https :
//doi.org/10.1081/BIO-120020169.
[47] Robert S Parker, Francis J Doyle, and Nicholas A Peppas. “The intravenous route to blood
glucose control”. In: IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine 20.1 (2001), pp. 65–
73.
[48] Claudio Cobelli and Alfredo Ruggeri. “Evaluation of portal/peripheral route and of algorithms
for insulin delivery in the closed-loop control of glucose in diabetes-A modeling study”. In:
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 2 (1983), pp. 93–103.
[49] Pier Giorgio Fabietti et al. “Clinical validation of a new control-oriented model of insulin and
glucose dynamics in subjects with type 1 diabetes”. In: Diabetes Technology & Therapeutics 9.4
(2007), pp. 327–338.
[50] Pier Giorgio Fabietti et al. “Control oriented model of insulin and glucose dynamics in type 1
diabetics”. In: Medical and Biological Engineering and Computing 44.1-2 (2006), pp. 69–78.
37

[51] Boris P Kovatchev et al. In silico preclinical trials: a proof of concept in closed-loop control of
type 1 diabetes. 2009.
[52] Robert S Parker et al. “Robust H∞ glucose control in diabetes using a physiological model”. In:
AIChE Journal 46.12 (2000), pp. 2537–2549.

[53] Frederick Chee and Tyrone Fernando. Closed-loop control of blood glucose. Vol. 368. Springer,
2007.
[54] Pierre-Yves Benhamou et al. “Closed-loop insulin delivery in adults with type 1 diabetes in
real-life conditions: a 12-week multicentre, open-label randomised controlled crossover trial”. In:
The Lancet Digital Health 1.1 (2019), e17–e25.
[55] Sue A Brown et al. “Six-month randomized, multicenter trial of closed-loop control in type 1
diabetes”. In: New England Journal of Medicine 381.18 (2019), pp. 1707–1717.
[56] Daniela Bruttomesso. “Toward automated insulin delivery”. In: N Engl J Med 381.18 (2019),
pp. 1774–1775.
[57] Martin Tauschmann et al. “Closed-loop insulin delivery in suboptimally controlled type 1
diabetes: a multicentre, 12-week randomised trial”. In: The Lancet 392.10155 (2018), pp. 1321–
1329.
[58] Hood Thabit et al. “Home use of an artificial beta cell in type 1 diabetes”. In: New England
Journal of Medicine 373.22 (2015), pp. 2129–2140.
[59] Bharath Sudharsan, Malinda Peeples, and Mansur Shomali. “Hypoglycemia prediction using
machine learning models for patients with type 2 diabetes”. In: Journal of diabetes science and
technology 9.1 (2014), pp. 86–90.
[60] Glen H Murata et al. “A probabilistic model for predicting hypoglycemia in type 2 diabetes
mellitus: The Diabetes Outcomes in Veterans Study (DOVES)”. In: Archives of internal medicine
164.13 (2004), pp. 1445–1450.
[61] Bryan S Gibson et al. “Development and validation of a predictive model of acute glucose
response to exercise in individuals with type 2 diabetes”. In: Diabetology & metabolic syndrome
5.1 (2013), p. 33.
[62] David Zeevi et al. “Personalized nutrition by prediction of glycemic responses”. In: Cell 163.5
(2015), pp. 1079–1094.
[63] Lucas P Beverlin et al. “An algorithm for optimally fitting a Wiener model”. In: Mathematical
problems in Engineering 2011 (2011).
[64] Derrick K Rollins et al. “Free-living inferential modeling of blood glucose level using only
noninvasive inputs”. In: Journal of process control 20.1 (2010), pp. 95–107.
[65] Raed Abu Zitar and Abdulkareem Al-Jabali. “Towards neural network model for insulin/glucose
in diabetics-II”. In: Informatica 29.2 (2005).
[66] Barbara Martinovic et al. “Modelling the glucose-insulin system of type 2 diabetes patients
using ARMAX models”. In: 2019 Australian & New Zealand Control Conference (ANZCC).
IEEE. 2019, pp. 88–93.
38

[67] Jun Yang et al. “An ARIMA model with adaptive orders for predicting blood glucose concentrations and hypoglycemia”. In: IEEE journal of biomedical and health informatics 23.3 (2018),
pp. 1251–1260.
[68] Eslam Montaser, José-Luis Dı́ez, and Jorge Bondia. “Stochastic seasonal models for glucose
prediction in the artificial pancreas”. In: Journal of diabetes science and technology 11.6 (2017),
pp. 1124–1131.
[69]

Jaques Reifman et al. “Predictive monitoring for improved management of glucose levels”. In:
Journal of diabetes science and technology 1.4 (2007), pp. 478–486.

[70] Troy Bremer and David A Gough. “Is blood glucose predictable from previous values? A
solicitation for data.” In: Diabetes 48.3 (1999), pp. 445–451.
[71] Adiwinata Gani et al. “Predicting subcutaneous glucose concentration in humans: data-driven
glucose modeling”. In: IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering 56.2 (2009), pp. 246–254.
[72] Giovanni Sparacino et al. “Glucose concentration can be predicted ahead in time from continuous
glucose monitoring sensor time-series”. In: IEEE Transactions on biomedical engineering 54.5
(2007), pp. 931–937.
[73] Zhongheng Zhang. “A mathematical model for predicting glucose levels in critically-ill patients:
the PIGnOLI model”. In: PeerJ 3 (2015), e1005.
[74] Andrew C Miller, Nicholas J Foti, and Emily Fox. “Learning Insulin-Glucose Dynamics in the
Wild”. In: Machine Learning for Healthcare Conference. PMLR. 2020, pp. 172–197.
[75] Kerri Cavanaugh et al. “Association of numeracy and diabetes control”. In: Annals of internal
medicine 148.10 (2008), pp. 737–746.
[76] Bryan Gibson et al. “Efficacy of a computerized simulation in promoting walking in individuals
with diabetes”. In: Journal of medical Internet research 14.3 (2012), e1965.
[77] Lena Mamykina et al. “Data-driven health management: reasoning about personally generated
data in diabetes with information technologies”. In: Journal of the American Medical Informatics
Association 23.3 (Mar. 2016), pp. 526–531. issn: 1527-974X. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocv187.
eprint: http://oup.prod.sis.lan/jamia/article-pdf/23/3/526/9515671/ocv187.pdf.
url: https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocv187.
[78] Lena Mamykina et al. “From personal informatics to personal analytics: Investigating how
clinicians and patients reason about personal data generated with self-monitoring in diabetes”.
In: Cognitive Informatics in Health and Biomedicine. Springer, 2017, pp. 301–313.
[79] Pooja M Desai et al. “Personal Health Oracle: Explorations of Personalized Predictions in
Diabetes Self-Management”. In: Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. ACM. 2019, p. 370.
[80] Pooja M Desai et al. “Pictures worth a thousand words: Reflections on visualizing personal
blood glucose forecasts for individuals with type 2 diabetes”. In: Proceedings of the 2018 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM. 2018, p. 538.

39

[81] David J Albers et al. “Mechanistic machine learning: how data assimilation leverages physiologic
knowledge using Bayesian inference to forecast the future, infer the present, and phenotype”. In:
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 25.10 (Oct. 2018), pp. 1392–1401. issn:
1527-974X. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocy106. eprint: http://oup.prod.sis.lan/jamia/articlepdf/25/10/1392/26051069/ocy106.pdf. url: https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocy106.
[82] Elaine Lum et al. “Decision support and alerts of apps for self-management of blood glucose for
type 2 diabetes”. In: Jama 321.15 (2019), pp. 1530–1532.
[83] Dietmar Glachs et al. “A Predictive Model-Based Decision Support System for Diabetes Patient
Empowerment”. In: Public Health and Informatics. IOS Press, 2021, pp. 963–968.
[84] Elliot G Mitchell et al. “Enabling personalized decision support with patient-generated data
and attributable components”. In: Journal of Biomedical Informatics 113 (2021), p. 103639.
[85] Heinz Werner Engl, Martin Hanke, and Andreas Neubauer. Regularization of inverse problems.
Vol. 375. Springer Science & Business Media, 1996.
[86] Jari Kaipio and Erkki Somersalo. Statistical and computational inverse problems. Vol. 160.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2006.
[87] Sha Wu and Eiko Furutani. “Nonlinear model predictive glycemic control of critically ill patients
using online identification of insulin sensitivity”. In: 2016 38th Annual International Conference
of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC). IEEE. 2016, pp. 2245–2248.
[88] Tom Van Herpe et al. “Glycemia Prediction in Critically Ill Patients Using an Adaptive
Modeling Approach”. In: Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology 1.3 (2007). PMID:
19885089, pp. 348–356. doi: 10 . 1177 / 193229680700100306. url: https : / / doi . org / 10 .
1177/193229680700100306.
[89] Roman Hovorka et al. “A simulation model of glucose regulation in the critically ill”. In:
Physiological measurement 29.8 (2008), p. 959.
[90] George Hripcsak and David J Albers. “Evaluating Prediction of Continuous Clinical Values: A
Glucose Case Study”. In: Methods of Information in Medicine (2022).
[91] Bernt Oksendal. Stochastic differential equations: an introduction with applications. Springer
Science & Business Media, 2013.
[92] David J Albers et al. “Personalized glucose forecasting for type 2 diabetes using data assimilation”. In: PLoS computational biology 13.4 (2017), e1005232.
[93] Andrew M Stuart. “Inverse problems: a Bayesian perspective”. In: Acta numerica 19 (2010),
pp. 451–559.
[94] Joon Ha and Arthur Sherman. “Type 2 diabetes: one disease, many pathways”. In: American
Journal of Physiology-Endocrinology and Metabolism 319.2 (2020), E410–E426.
[95] David J Albers et al. “Estimating summary statistics for electronic health record laboratory
data for use in high-throughput phenotyping algorithms”. In: Journal of biomedical informatics
78 (2018), pp. 87–101.

40

[96] DJ Albers and George Hripcsak. “A statistical dynamics approach to the study of human health
data: resolving population scale diurnal variation in laboratory data”. In: Physics letters A
374.9 (2010), pp. 1159–1164.
[97] George Hripcsak and David J Albers. “High-fidelity phenotyping: richness and freedom from
bias”. In: Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 25.3 (2017), pp. 289–294.
[98] George Hripcsak and David J Albers. “Next-generation phenotyping of electronic health records”.
In: Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 20.1 (2012), pp. 117–121.
[99] Matthew E Levine, David J Albers, and George Hripcsak. “Methodological variations in
lagged regression for detecting physiologic drug effects in EHR data”. In: Journal of biomedical
informatics 86 (2018), pp. 149–159.
[100] Rimma Pivovarov et al. “Identifying and mitigating biases in EHR laboratory tests”. In: Journal
of biomedical informatics 51 (2014), pp. 24–34.
[101] Gilbert A Churchill Jr. “A paradigm for developing better measures of marketing constructs”.
In: Journal of marketing research 16.1 (1979), pp. 64–73.
[102] David M Hardesty and William O Bearden. “The use of expert judges in scale development:
Implications for improving face validity of measures of unobservable constructs”. In: Journal of
Business Research 57.2 (2004), pp. 98–107.
[103] Irving B Weiner and W Edward Craighead. The Corsini encyclopedia of psychology. Vol. 4.
John Wiley & Sons, 2010.
[104] David J Albers et al. “Ensemble Kalman methods with constraints”. In: Inverse Problems 35.9
(2019), p. 095007.
[105] Rachel E Sherman et al. “Real-world evidence—what is it and what can it tell us”. In: N Engl
J Med 375.23 (2016), pp. 2293–2297.

41

Supplementary Material
Optimization
In solving the parameter estimation problem with the optimization approach, our goal here is to
determine parameter values, θ, which maximize the posterior distribution, P(θ|y) and is called to

arXiv:1910.14193v3 [q-bio.QM] 21 Sep 2022

be the maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimator. Using the prior distribution as specified above, the
parameter estimation problem becomes
θ∗ = arg max P(θ|y) = arg max P(y|θ) = arg min − log(P(θ|y)).
θ

θ∈Θ

(1)

θ∈Θ

Remember that for the parameter estimation problem with the Minimal Stochastic Glucose model, we
have
− log(P(θ|y)) =

Km
1
1
log(2π) + log(det(S(θ))) + (y − Lm(θ))T S(θ)−1 (y − Lm(θ)).
2
2
2

(2)

Then, substituting (2) into (1), the problem will take the form
θ∗ = arg min ||S(θ)−1/2 (y − Lm(θ))||2 + log(det(S(θ))).

(3)

θ∈Θ

Hence, placing uniform prior distribution turns the problem of finding the MAP estimator into a
constrained optimization problem. To solve this problem, we use built-in MATLAB functions, such as
fmincon and multistart. fmincon is a gradient-based minimization algorithm for nonlinear functions.
multistart starts the optimization procedure from the indicated number of starting points that
are picked uniformly over the region defined by the constraints. It uses fmincon and other similar
algorithms to perform each optimization process independently and provides the one that achieves the
minimum value among the results of all separate runs. With this approach, we have the opportunity
to compare different optimization procedures that start from different initial points. This provides
some intuitive understanding of the solution surface and hence the estimated optimal parameters.
Once an optimal point has been found, we may also employ the Laplace approximation [1, 2]
to obtain a Gaussian approximation to the posterior distribution. The Laplace approximation is a
reasonable approximation in many data rich scenarios in which all parameters are identifiable from the
data, because of the Bernstein Von Mises Theorem [3], which asserts that the posterior distribution
will then be approximately Gaussian, centered near the truth and with variance which shrinks to zero
as more and more data is acquired. However data is not always abundant, and not all parameters are
identifiable even if it is; in this setting sampling the posterior distribution is desirable, and for this
purpose, we use Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques.

Markov Chain Monte Carlo
MCMC methods are a flexible set of techniques which may be used to sample from a target distribution,
which is not necessarily analytically tractable, [4, 5]. For example, the distribution P(θ|y) is the
conditional distribution of the random model parameters, θ given the data, y. Even though we can

1

explicitly formulate it using the Bayes’ Theorem, it is not always an easy task to extract useful
quantities, such as posterior mean and variance, from that formula. In such cases, MCMC techniques
are used to generate random samples from this target distribution and this random sample is used to
obtain the desired information, which could be anything such as the mean, mode, covariance matrix, or
higher moments of the parameters. Moreover, this technique is also very helpful to obtain uncertainty
quantification (UQ) results for the estimated parameters.
In order to obtain more extensive knowledge than MAP estimator can provide about the posterior
distribution of parameters given the data, θ|y, we use MCMC methods as a natural choice to sample
from that distribution. Among different possible algorithms (see [6]), we use the standard random
walk Metropolis-Hastings algorithm. In order to make sure the resulting sample is indeed a good
representer of the posterior distribution, we perform some diagnostics such as checking if chains for
each parameter converged and if they are uncorrelated. Then, after removing the burn-in period, we
compute the mean and the covariance matrix from the remaining part of the sample. We use the
mean as a point estimator for simulation and forecasting, and the covariance matrix provides valuable
information to quantify uncertainty for the estimated parameters.
In general, it is hard to obtain efficient results with MCMC methods even when sampling from
the joint distribution of four or five parameters, due to the issues such as parameter identification.
Moreover, obtaining accurate results with this approach requires careful choice of starting point and
tuning some other parameters. In general the performance of the algorithm will depend on the initial
point. We tested the use of both random starting points and MAP estimators as starting point. The
former enables us to detect when several modes are present in the posterior distribution; the latter
helps to focus sampling near to the most likely parameter estimate and to quantify uncertainty in it.
However, it is also important to note that using MAP estimator as a starting point is not helpful in
all cases. More precisely, if the MAP estimator is not a global minimum but a local minimum, then
the chain could get stuck around this point. Therefore, it requires careful analysis, comparison and
synthesis of the results obtained with these different approaches.

Insight About the MSG Model’s Ability to Capture ICU Dynamics
We explain here how the model captures the BG dynamics in the ICU setting. Consider Fig 1,
which demonstrates both the model’s relative robustness and its capability of capturing the dynamics
and various complexities encountered in different conditions in the ICU setting. These figures show
simulated BG values for patient 4 over different training time windows for which the parameters are
estimated with the optimization approach. Here the the red curves represent the mean of the BG
dynamics that are assumed to be oscillatory, the amplitude of oscillations are expected to lie in the gray
region as it is the 2-stdev band around the mean. The red circles show the BG measurements the light
blue curve shows the tube-nutrition input rate. For simplicity we consider patient 4 who did not need
any exogenous insulin, so the tube-feed nutrition is the only driver of the BG level. Each subfigure of
Fig 1 shows a different training time window that is representative of different circumstances relative
to our ability to estimate Gb , γ, and σ.
Fig 1a shows a situation where the BG measurements (the output of the system) reflect the nutrition
rate (the input to the system) quite well. As the nutrition rate, the only driver of the system included
2

(a) Gb =106.49,
γ=0.07, σ=12.34

(b) Gb =131.40,
γ=0.49, σ=13.33

(c) Gb =139.12,
γ=0.50, σ=17.61

Figure 1: BG simulations are shown with respective to the estimated parameters over respective
training time window. In each plot, the light blue curve is the glucose rate in the nutrition delivered to
the patient (right y-axis), the red circles show the true BG measurements (left y-axis), the red curve is
the mean of the model output (left y-axis), and the gray area is the 2-stdev band around the mean
of the model output (left y-axis). These figures show two main cases that could arise as a result of
parameter estimation in the ICU setting: (a): the input (nutrition rate) is reflected in the output (BG
measurements), (b) and (c): the input is not reflected in the output, which makes it impossible to
estimate the decay rate γ accurately.
in the model, the BG measurements increases, which is reflected in the mean of the model output.
In contrast, Fig 1b and 1c demonstrate a situation where the BG measurements do not reflect the
nutrition rate over the shown time window. In Fig 1b, we see that there is no change in the nutrition
rate over the whole time window, which is clearly reflected by the mean of the model output. However,
having no change in the nutrition rate means that there is no opportunity to “learn” the glycemic
decay parameter, γ. Therefore, in the absence of any information, optimization algorithm provides the
possible largest value to reflect non-changing nutrition rate in the mean of the model output, which
also around the mean of all the BG measurements in the respective training time window.
On the other hand, the situation in Fig 1c occurs when the changes in the BG measurement are
uncorrelated with the changes in the nutrition rate, potentially due to changes in health states or
other interventions, e.g., other hormone drips. Hence it is impossible for the model parameters to
accurately reflect the physiology as they are accounting for dynamical glucose features that they were
not designed to accommodate. Observe from Fig 1c that, with a γ value as in Fig 1a, there should
be a substantial decrease in the mean of the model output due to the decrease in the nutrition rate.
Since this is not the case as seen by the BG measurements, the optimization algorithm provides a
reasonable mean model output (characterized by Gb ) and set the decay rate as high as possible (here
the upper bound for this parameter) so that it could keep the mean model output constant over the
whole interval accommodating for the two widely different nutrition rate regimes.
These issues do not mean the model cannot represent and forecast the glycemic dynamics, it still is
usually able to represent glycemic dynamics, but some of the parameters might lose their intended
meaning. For example, in the two respective examples, despite parameter estimate issues, in both of
these cases the estimated Gb , and σ values are enough to capture the mean and variance of the BG
measurements accurately. These examples are not the only cases where we observe parameter estimates
that are not physiologically valid while at the same time the glucose forecast and modeling itself
3

remains accurate. The other examples are all variations of the same theme; we either do not have the
available data to estimate a parameter accurately, or the data are behaving in a more complex manner,
and in both cases, the parameters make up for these data-driven and model-driven short-comings by
deviating from their normal roles to render a robust glucose forecast. It is likely that problems such as
these will not be eliminated by using more complex datasets and more complex models, because full
representation of the relevant processes is out of reach in such non-stationary ICU settings.

Parameter Identifiability Issues in the ICU Setting
We encountered some parameter identifiability issues while solving the optimization problem stated in
(3) in the ICU setting, which caused the solution surface, the function we minimize (P(θ|y)), to be
flat in some parameter directions. Because of this reason, the Hessian matrix becomes ill-conditioned.
However, the Laplace approximation requires computing the inverse of the Hessian matrix, which gives
the variance of the estimated unknown model parameters on the diagonal. When we compute the
inverse of an ill-conditioned Hessian matrix, the resulting matrix has very large entries. Hence the
variance of the estimated model parameters is also unreasonably large, resulting in non-useful UQ
results, which can be seen in Fig 2.

The Effect of Blood Glucose Measurement Pattern to Parameter Estimation
in the T2DM Setting
We observed that the BG measurement pattern of T2DM patients significantly affects the values of
estimated model parameters based on this patient-collected data. For each patient, we computed the
time difference between the meal time and the first BG measurement after that meal time for each
meal recorded during the training time window. We show the histogram of these time differences for
each patient in Fig 3. We see that patients 1 and 3 measured their BG levels at varying times after
meal consumption. However, patient 2 measured precisely after two hours for each meal.

4

(a) Patient 4

(b) Patient 5

(c) Patient 6

Figure 2: The figure shows the UQ bands when we use the optimization approach for parameter
estimation in the ICU setting. Because of the parameter identifiability issues, the Hessian matrix is-ill
conditioned. When we compute its inverse to obtain the variance in the estimated model parameters,
we obtain unreasonably wide UQ bands.

5

(a) Patient 1

(b) Patient 2

(c) Patient 3

Figure 3: Each histogram shows the elapsed time after meal time until the first BG measurement for
each meal in the training time window. Lack of variability of patient 2 causes suboptimal parameter
estimation and forecasting results for this patient.

6

References
[1] David JC MacKay. Information theory, inference and learning algorithms. Cambridge university
press, 2003.
[2]

Art B. Owen. Monte Carlo theory, methods and examples. 2013.

[3]

Aad W Van der Vaart. Asymptotic statistics. Vol. 3. Cambridge university press, 2000.

[4] Jun S Liu. Monte Carlo strategies in scientific computing. Springer Science & Business Media,
2008.
[5] Christian Robert and George Casella. Monte Carlo statistical methods. Springer Science & Business
Media, 2013.
[6]

Andrew Gelman et al. Bayesian data analysis. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2013.

7

